LE JARDIN.

    The lily’s withered chalice falls
      Around its rod of dusty gold,
      And from the beech trees on the wold
    The last wood-pigeon coos and calls.

    The gaudy leonine sunflower
      Hangs black and barren on its stalk,
      And down the windy garden walk
    The dead leaves scatter,--hour by hour.

    Pale privet-petals white as milk
      Are blown into a snowy mass;
      The roses lie upon the grass,
    Like little shreds of crimson silk.

LA MER.

    A white mist drifts across the shrouds,
      A wild moon in this wintry sky
      Gleams like an angry lion’s eye
    Out of a mane of tawny clouds.

    The muffled steersman at the wheel
      Is but a shadow in the gloom;--
      And in the throbbing engine room
    Leap the long rods of polished steel.

    The shattered storm has left its trace
      Upon this huge and heaving dome,
      For the thin threads of yellow foam
    Float on the waves like ravelled lace.

I fear I cannot picture America as altogether an Elysium--perhaps, from
the ordinary standpoint I know but little about the country. I cannot
give its latitude or longitude; I cannot compute the value of its dry
goods, and I have no very close acquaintance with its politics. These
are matters which may not interest you, and they certainly are not
interesting to me.

The first thing that struck me on landing in America was that if the
Americans are not the most well-dressed people in the world, they are
the most comfortably dressed. Men are seen there with the dreadful
chimney-pot hat, but there are very few hatless men; men wear the
shocking swallow-tail coat, but few are to be seen with no coat at all.
There is an air of comfort in the appearance of the people which is a
marked contrast to that seen in this country, where, too often, people
are seen in close contact with rags.

The next thing particularly noticeable is that everybody seems in a
hurry to catch a train. This is a state of things which is not
favourable to poetry or romance. Had Romeo or Juliet been in a constant
state of anxiety about trains, or had their minds been agitated by the
question of return-tickets, Shakespeare could not have given us those
lovely balcony scenes which are so full of poetry and pathos.

America is the noisiest country that ever existed. One is waked up in
the morning, not by the singing of the nightingale, but by the steam
whistle. It is surprising that the sound practical sense of the
Americans does not reduce this intolerable noise. All Art depends upon
exquisite and delicate sensibility, and such continual turmoil must
ultimately be destructive of the musical faculty.

There is not so much beauty to be found in American cities as in Oxford,
Cambridge, Salisbury or Winchester, where are lovely relics of a
beautiful age; but still there is a good deal of beauty to be seen in
them now and then, but only where the American has not attempted to
create it. Where the Americans have attempted to produce beauty they
have signally failed. A remarkable characteristic of the Americans is
the manner in which they have applied science to modern life.

This is apparent in the most cursory stroll through New York. In England
an inventor is regarded almost as a crazy man, and in too many instances
invention ends in disappointment and poverty. In America an inventor is
honoured, help is forthcoming, and the exercise of ingenuity, the
application of science to the work of man, is there the shortest road to
wealth. There is no country in the world where machinery is so lovely as
in America.

I have always wished to believe that the line of strength and the line
of beauty are one. That wish was realised when I contemplated American
machinery. It was not until I had seen the water-works at Chicago that I
realised the wonders of machinery; the rise and fall of the steel rods,
the symmetrical motion of the great wheels is the most beautifully
rhythmic thing I have ever seen.[3] One is impressed in America, but not
favourably impressed, by the inordinate size of everything. The country
seems to try to bully one into a belief in its power by its impressive
bigness.

I was disappointed with Niagara--most people must be disappointed with
Niagara. Every American bride is taken there, and the sight of the
stupendous waterfall must be one of the earliest, if not the keenest,
disappointments in American married life. One sees it under bad
conditions, very far away, the point of view not showing the splendour
of the water. To appreciate it really one has to see it from underneath
the fall, and to do that it is necessary to be dressed in a yellow
oil-skin, which is as ugly as a mackintosh--and I hope none of you ever
wears one. It is a consolation to know, however, that such an artist as
Madame Bernhardt has not only worn that yellow, ugly dress, but has been
photographed in it.

Perhaps the most beautiful part of America is the West, to reach which,
however, involves a journey by rail of six days, racing along tied to an
ugly tin-kettle of a steam engine. I found but poor consolation for this
journey in the fact that the boys who infest the cars and sell
everything that one can eat--or should not eat--were selling editions of
my poems vilely printed on a kind of grey blotting paper, for the low
price of ten cents.[4] Calling these boys on one side I told them that
though poets like to be popular they desire to be paid, and selling
editions of my poems without giving me a profit is dealing a blow at
literature which must have a disastrous effect on poetical aspirants.
The invariable reply that they made was that they themselves made a
profit out of the transaction and that was all they cared about.

It is a popular superstition that in America a visitor is invariably
addressed as “Stranger.” I was never once addressed as “Stranger.” When
I went to Texas I was called “Captain”; when I got to the centre of the
country I was addressed as “Colonel,” and, on arriving at the borders of
Mexico, as “General.” On the whole, however, “Sir,” the old English
method of addressing people is the most common.

It is, perhaps, worth while to note that what many people call
Americanisms are really old English expressions which have lingered in
our colonies while they have been lost in our own country. Many people
imagine that the term “I guess,” which is so common in America, is
purely an American expression, but it was used by John Locke in his work
on “The Understanding,” just as we now use “I think.”[5]

It is in the colonies, and not in the mother country, that the old life
of the country really exists. If one wants to realise what English
Puritanism is--not at its worst (when it is very bad), but at its best,
and then it is not very good--I do not think one can find much of it in
England, but much can be found about Boston and Massachusetts. We have
got rid of it. America still preserves it, to be, I hope, a short-lived
curiosity.

San Francisco is a really beautiful city. China Town, peopled by Chinese
labourers, is the most artistic town I have ever come across. The
people--strange, melancholy Orientals, whom many people would call
common, and they are certainly very poor--have determined that they will
have nothing about them that is not beautiful. In the Chinese
restaurant, where these navvies meet to have supper in the evening, I
found them drinking tea out of china cups as delicate as the petals of a
rose-leaf, whereas at the gaudy hotels I was supplied with a delf cup an
inch and a half thick. When the Chinese bill was presented it was made
out on rice paper, the account being done in Indian ink as fantastically
as if an artist had been etching little birds on a fan.

Salt Lake City contains only two buildings of note, the chief being the
Tabernacle, which is in the shape of a soup-kettle. It is decorated by
the only native artist, and he has treated religious subjects in the
naive spirit of the early Florentine painters, representing people of
our own day in the dress of the period side by side with people of
Biblical history who are clothed in some romantic costume.

The building next in importance is called the Amelia Palace, in honour
of one of Brigham Young’s wives. When he died the present president of
the Mormons stood up in the Tabernacle and said that it had been
revealed to him that he was to have the Amelia Palace, and that on this
subject there were to be no more revelations of any kind!

From Salt Lake City one travels over the great plains of Colorado and up
the Rocky Mountains, on the top of which is Leadville, the richest city
in the world. It has also got the reputation of being the roughest, and
every man carries a revolver. I was told that if I went there they
would be sure to shoot me or my travelling manager. I wrote and told
them that nothing that they could do to my travelling manager would
intimidate me. They are miners--men working in metals, so I lectured to
them on the Ethics of Art. I read them passages from the autobiography
of Benvenuto Cellini and they seemed much delighted. I was reproved by
my hearers for not having brought him with me. I explained that he had
been dead for some little time which elicited the enquiry “Who shot
him”? They afterwards took me to a dancing saloon where I saw the only
rational method of art criticism I have ever come across. Over the piano
was printed a notice:--

The mortality among pianists in that place is marvellous. Then they
asked me to supper, and having accepted, I had to descend a mine in a
rickety bucket in which it was impossible to be graceful. Having got
into the heart of the mountain I had supper, the first course being
whisky, the second whisky and the third whisky.

I went to the Theatre to lecture and I was informed that just before I
went there two men had been seized for committing a murder, and in that
theatre they had been brought on to the stage at eight o’clock in the
evening, and then and there tried and executed before a crowded
audience. But I found these miners very charming and not at all rough.

Among the more elderly inhabitants of the South I found a melancholy
tendency to date every event of importance by the late war. “How
beautiful the moon is to-night,” I once remarked to a gentleman who was
standing next to me. “Yes,” was his reply, “but you should have seen it
before the war.”

So infinitesimal did I find the knowledge of Art, west of the Rocky
Mountains, that an art patron--one who in his day had been a
miner--actually sued the railroad company for damages because the
plaster cast of Venus of Milo, which he had imported from Paris, had
been delivered minus the arms. And, what is more surprising still, he
gained his case and the damages.

Pennsylvania, with its rocky gorges and woodland scenery, reminded me of
Switzerland. The prairie reminded me of a piece of blotting-paper.

The Spanish and French have left behind them memorials in the beauty of
their names. All the cities that have beautiful names derive them from
the Spanish or the French. The English people give intensely ugly names
to places. One place had such an ugly name that I refused to lecture
there. It was called Grigsville. Supposing I had founded a school of Art
there--fancy “Early Grigsville.” Imagine a School of Art teaching
“Grigsville Renaissance.”

As for slang I did not hear much of it, though a young lady who had
changed her clothes after an afternoon dance did say that “after the
heel kick she shifted her day goods.”

American youths are pale and precocious, or sallow and supercilious, but
American girls are pretty and charming--little oases of pretty
unreasonableness in a vast desert of practical common-sense.

Every American girl is entitled to have twelve young men devoted to her.
They remain her slaves and she rules them with charming nonchalance.

The men are entirely given to business; they have, as they say, their
brains in front of their heads. They are also exceedingly acceptive of
new ideas. Their education is practical. We base the education of
children entirely on books, but we must give a child a mind before we
can instruct the mind. Children have a natural antipathy to
books--handicraft should be the basis of education. Boys and girls
should be taught to use their hands to make something, and they would be
less apt to destroy and be mischievous.

In going to America one learns that poverty is not a necessary
accompaniment to civilisation. There at any rate is a country that has
no trappings, no pageants and no gorgeous ceremonies. I saw only two
processions--one was the Fire Brigade preceded by the Police, the other
was the Police preceded by the Fire Brigade.

Every man when he gets to the age of twenty-one is allowed a vote, and
thereby immediately acquires his political education. The Americans are
the best politically educated people in the world. It is well worth
one’s while to go to a country which can teach us the beauty of the word
FREEDOM and the value of the thing LIBERTY.

The mystery of love is greater than the mystery of death.

Women are made to be loved, not to be understood.

It is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one should read and
what one shouldn't. Moren than half of modern culture depends on what
one shouldn't read.

Women, as someone says, love with their ears, just as men love with
their eyes, if they ever love at all.

It is better to be beautiful than to be good, but it is better to be
good than to be ugly.

Nothing looks so like innocence as an indiscretion.

Misfortunes one can endure, they come from outside, they are accidents.
But to suffer for one's faults--ah! there is the sting of life.

Beauty is the only thing that time cannot harm. Philosophies fall away
like sand, creeds follow one another, but what is beautiful is a joy for
all seasons, a possession for all eternity.

Questions are never indiscreet; answers sometimes are.

Twenty years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years
of marriage make her something like a public building.

The only thing that one really knows about human nature is that it
changes.

Anyone can sympathise with the sufferings of a friend, but it requires a
very fine nature to sympathise with a friend's success.

Selfishness is not living as one wishes to live, it is asking others to
live as one wishes to live: and unselfishness is letting other people's
lives alone, not interfering with them.

A man who does not think for himself does not think at all.

Nowadays people seem to look on life as a speculation. It is not a
speculation. It is a sacrament. Its ideal is love. Its purification is
sacrifice.

In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his neighbour. In
fact, to be a bit better than one's neighbour was considered excessively
vulgar and middle class. Nowadays, with our modern mania for morality,
everyone has to pose as a paragon of purity, incorruptibility, and all
the other seven deadly virtues. And what is the result? You all go over
like ninepins--one after the other.

All sympathy is fine, but sympathy with suffering is the least fine
mode.

If you pretend to be good the world takes you very seriously. If you
pretend to be bad it doesn't. Such is the astounding stupidity of
optimism.

It is most dangerous nowadays for a husband to pay any attention to his
wife in public. It always makes people think that he beats her when
they're alone. The world has grown so suspicious of anything that looks
like a happy married life.

Actors are so fortunate. They can choose whether they will appear in
tragedy or in comedy, whether they will suffer or make merry, laugh or
shed tears. But in real life it is different. Most men and women are
forced to perform parts for which they have no qualifications. The world
is a stage, but the play is badly cast.

Men know life too early; women know life too late-that is the difference
between men and women.

He who stands most remote from his age is he who mirrors it best.

There is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and
that is not being talked about.

Life is not governed by will or intention. Life is a question of nerves
and fibres and slowly built-up cells, in which thought hides itself and
passion has its dreams.

Man is a being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex,
multiform creature that bears within itself strange legacies of thought
and passion, and whose very flesh is tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead.

As long as a woman can look ten years younger than her own daughter she
is perfectly satisfied.

There is always something infinitely mean about other people's
tragedies.

Public and private life are different things. They have different laws
and move on different lines.

When one is placed in the position of guardian one has to adopt a very
high moral tone on all subjects. It's one's duty to do so.

I have always been of opinion that a man who desires to get married
should know either everything or nothing.

An engagement should come on a young girl as a surprise, pleasant or
unpleasant, as the case may be. It is hardly a matter that she could be
allowed to arrange for herself.

If the lower classes don't set us a good example what on earth is the
use of them? They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral
responsibility.

If a woman cannot make her mistakes charming she is only a female.

The world was made for men and not for women.

It is always with the best intentions that the worst work is done.

If you wish to understand others you must intensify your own
individualism.

Why do you talk so trivially about life? Because I think that life is
far too important a thing ever to talk seriously about it.

What a pity that in life we only get our lessons when they are of no use
to us.

It is better to have a permanent income than to be fascinating.

Relations are simply a tedious pack of people who haven't got the
remotest knowledge of how to live nor the smallest instinct about when
to die.

Charity creates a multitude of sins.

My experience is that as soon as people are old enough to know better
they don't know anything at all.

Truth is a very complex thing and politics is a very complex business.
There are wheels within wheels. One may be under certain obligations to
people that one must pay. Sooner or later in political life one has to
compromise. Everyone does.

Men can love what is beneath them--things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured. We women worship when we love; and when we lose our worship
we lose everything.

The proper basis for marriage is a mutual misunderstanding.

The one advantage of playing with fire is that one never gets even
singed. It is the people who don't know how to play with it who get
burned up.

There are moments when one has to choose between living one's own life
fully, entirely, completely, or dragging out some false, shallow,
degrading existence that the world in its hypocrisy demands.

When one is in town one amuses oneself. When one is in the country one
amuses other people. It is excessively boring.

Romance is the privilege of the rich, not the profession of the
unemployed. The poor should be practical and prosaic.

An acquaintance that begins with a compliment is sure to develop into a
real friendship. It starts in the right manner.

The truths of metaphysics are the truths of masks.

Science can never grapple with the irrational. That is why it has no
future before it in this world.

The happy people of the world have their value, but only the negative
value of foils. They throw up and emphasise the beauty and the
fascination of the unhappy.

In this world there are only two tragedies. One is not getting what one
wants, and the other is getting it. The last is much the worst--the last
is a real tragedy.

Disobedience in the eyes of anyone who has read history is man's
original virtue. It is through disobedience that progress has been
made--through disobedience and rebellion.

It is not wise to find symbols in everything that one sees. It makes
life too full of terrors.

Comfort is the only thing our civilisation can give us.

Politics are my only pleasure. You see nowadays it is not fashionable to
flirt till one is forty or to be romantic till one is forty-five, so we
poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have nothing open to us
but politics or philanthropy. And philanthropy seems to me to have
become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures. I prefer politics. I think they are more ... becoming.

One's past is what one is. It is the only way by which people should be
judged.

In a very ugly and sensible age the arts borrow, not from life, but from
each other.

It is always a silly thing to give advice, but to give good advice is
fatal.

Secrets from other people's wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.
So, at least, I am told at the club by people who are bald enough to
know better. But no man should have a secret from his own wife. She
invariably finds it out. Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They discover everything except the obvious.

Life holds the mirror up to art, and either reproduces some strange type
imagined by painter or sculptor or realises in fact what has been
dreamed in fiction.

I feel sure that if I lived in the country for six months I should
become so unsophisticated that no one would take the slightest notice of
me.

To recommend thrift to the poor is both grotesque and insulting. It is
like advising a man who is starving to eat less.

A thing is not necessarily true because a man dies for it.

I am always saying what I shouldn't say; in fact, I usually say what I
really think--a great mistake nowadays. It makes one so liable to be
misunderstood.

Experience is the name everyone gives to their mistakes.

The true perfection of man lies, not in what man has, but in what man
is.

The basis of every scandal is an absolute immoral certainty.

People talk so much about the beauty of confidence. They seem to
entirely ignore the much more subtle beauty of doubt. To believe is very
dull. To doubt is intensely engrossing. To be on the alert is to live,
to be lulled into security is to die.

Every effect that one produces gives one an enemy. To be popular one
must be a mediocrity.

It is a sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names
to things. Names are everything. I never quarrel with actions, my one
quarrel is with words. That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in
literature. The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled
to use one. It is the only thing he is fit for.

A high moral tone can hardly be said to conduce very much to either
one's health or one's happiness.

There are terrible temptations that it requires strength--strength and
courage--to yield to. To stake all one's life on one throw--whether the
stake be power or pleasure I care not--there is no weakness in that.
There is a horrible, a terrible, courage.

Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.

All charming people are spoiled. It is the secret of their attraction.

There is more to be said for stupidity than people imagine. Personally,
I have a great admiration for stupidity. It is a sort of fellow-feeling,
I suppose.

All men are monsters. The only thing to do is to feed the wretches well.
A good cook does wonders.

There is no such thing as an omen.

Destiny does not send us heralds. She is too wise or too cruel for that.

Crying is the refuge of plain women but the ruin of pretty ones.

Love art for its own sake and then all things that you need will be
added to you. This devotion to beauty and to the creation of beautiful
things is the test of all great civilisations; it is what makes the life
of each citizen a sacrament and not a speculation.

It is always worth while asking a question, though it is not always
answering one.

It takes a thoroughly good woman to do a thoroughly stupid thing.

With a proper background women can do anything.

Chiromancy is a most dangerous science, and one that ought not to be
encouraged, except in a 'tête-à-tête.'

One should never take sides in anything. Taking sides is the beginning
of sincerity, and earnestness follows shortly afterwards, and the human
being becomes a bore.

The work of art is beautiful by being what art never has been; and to
measure it by the standard of the past is to measure it by a standard on
the reflection of which its real perfection depends.

There are three kinds of despots. There is the despot who tyrannises
over the body. There is the despot who tyrannises over the soul. There
is the despot who tyrannises over soul and body alike. The first is
called the prince. The second is called the pope. The third is called
the people.

Costume is a growth, an evolution, and a most important, perhaps the
most important, sign of the manners, customs, and mode of life of each
century.

I really don't see anything romantic in proposing. It is very romantic
to be in love, but there is nothing romantic about a definite proposal.
Why, one may be accepted. One usually is, I believe. Then the excitement
is all over. The very essence of romance is uncertainty.

What consoles one nowadays is not repentance but pleasure. Repentance is
quite out of date.

Ideals are dangerous things. Realities are better. They wound, but they
are better.

Unless one is wealthy there is no use in being a charming fellow.

Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on. The loves and sorrows that
are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.

An eternal smile is much more wearisome than a perpetual frown. The one
sweeps away all possibilities, the other suggests a thousand.

To disagree with three-fourths of England on all points is one of the
first elements of vanity, which is a deep source of consolation in all
moments of spiritual doubt.

Women live by their emotions and for them, they have no philosophy of
life.

As long as war is regarded as wicked it will always have a fascination.
When it is looked upon as vulgar it will cease to be popular.

There is only one thing worse than injustice, and that is justice
without her sword in her hand. When right is not might it is evil.

We spend our days, each one of us, in looking for the secret of life.
Well, the secret of life is in art.

The truth isn't quite the sort of thing that one tells to a nice, sweet,
refined girl.

If one plays good music people don't listen, and if one plays bad music
people don't talk.

How fond women are of doing dangerous things. It is one of the qualities
in them that I admire most. A woman will flirt with anybody in the world
as long as other people are looking on.

Englishwomen conceal their feelings till after they are married. They
show them then.

Moderation is a fatal thing. Nothing succeeds like excess.

Actions are the first tragedy in life, words are the second. Words are
perhaps the worst. Words are merciless.

Life is terrible. It rules us, we do not rule it.

In art there is no such thing as a universal truth. A truth in art is
that whose contradictory is also true.

One's days are too brief to take the burden of another's sorrows on
one's shoulders. Each man lives his own life, and pays his own price for
living it. The only pity is that one has to pay so often for a single
fault. One has to pay over and over again, indeed. In her dealings with
man Destiny never closes her accounts.

Pleasure is Nature's test, her sign of approval. When we are happy we
are always good, but when we are good we are not always happy.

The people who love only once in their lives are really the shallow
people. What they call their loyalty and their fidelity I call either
the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.

Better to take pleasure in a rose than to put its root under a
microscope.

Of Shakespeare it may be said that he was the first to see the dramatic
value of doublets and that a climax may depend on a crinoline.

Plain women are always jealous of their husbands; beautiful women never
are! They never have time. They are always so occupied in being jealous
of other people's husbands.

What between the duties expected of one during one's lifetime and the
duties exacted from one after one's death land has ceased to be either a
profit or a pleasure. It gives one position and prevents one from
keeping it up.

A man who moralises is usually a hypocrite, and a woman who moralises is
invariably plain. There is nothing in the whole world so unbecoming to a
woman as a nonconformist conscience. And most women know it, I am glad
to say.

It was a fatal day when the public discovered that the pen is mightier
than the paving-stone and can be made as offensive as a brickbat.

A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth even
glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is
always landing. And when Humanity lands there it looks out, and, seeing
a better country, sets sail. Progress is the realisation of Utopias.

What is the difference between scandal and gossip? Oh! gossip is
charming! History is merely gossip, but scandal is gossip made tedious
by morality.

All beautiful things belong to the same age.

It is personalities, not principles, that move the age.

Modern pictures are, no doubt, delightful to look at. At least, some of
them are. But they are quite impossible to live with; they are too
clever, too assertive, too intellectual. Their meaning is too obvious
and their method too clearly defined. One exhausts what they have to say
in a very short time, and then they become as tedious as one's
relations.

To know nothing about our great men is one of the necessary elements of
English education.

The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would be very
tedious if it were either and modern literature a complete
impossibility.

You may laugh, but it is a great thing to come across a woman who
thoroughly understands one.

The majority of people spoil their lives by an unhealthy and exaggerated
altruism.

The number of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is
perfectly scandalous. It looks so bad. It is simply washing one's clean
linen in public.

The chief thing that makes life a failure from the artistic point of
view is the thing that lends to life its sordid security--the fact that
one can never repeat exactly the same emotion.

We teach people how to remember, we never teach them how to grow.

Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has
given them an idea, whether one is serious or not. Nothing is serious
except passion. The intellect is not a serious thing and never has been.
It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all. The only serious
form of intellect I know is the British intellect, and on the British
intellect the illiterate always plays the drum.

It is absurd to divide people into good and bad. People are either
charming or tedious.

It is only the modern that ever become old-fashioned.

It is only the Philistine who seeks to estimate a personality by the
vulgar test of production.

Musical people are so absurdly unreasonable. They always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.

Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern. One is apt to grow
old-fashioned quite suddenly.

The fact of a man being a poisoner is nothing against his prose. The
domestic virtues are not the true basis of art.

To the philosopher women represent the triumph of matter over mind, just
as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.

The only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so
completely that he loses all possible interest in life.

The only horrible thing in the world is 'ennui.' That is the one sin for
which there is no forgiveness.

French songs I cannot possibly allow. People always seem to think that
they are improper, and either look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh,
which is worse.

It has often been made a subject of reproach against artists and men of
letters that they are lacking in wholeness and completeness of nature.
As a rule this must necessarily be so. That very concentration of vision
and inversity of purpose which is the characteristic of the artistic
temperament is in itself a mode of limitation. To those who are
preoccupied with the beauty of form nothing else seems of so much
importance.

The work of art is to dominate the spectator. The spectator is not to
dominate the work of art.

One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of life. The
less said about life's sores the better.

You can't make people good by act of Parliament--that is something.

Art creates an incomparable and unique effect, and having done so passes
on to other things. Nature, on the other hand, forgetting that imitation
can be made the sincerest form of insult, keeps on repeating the effect
until we all become absolutely wearied of it.

It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about nowadays saying things
against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely true.

A true artist takes no notice whatever of the public. The public are to
him non-existent.

One should never trust a woman who tells one her real age. A woman who
would tell one that would tell one anything.

Nothing is so aggravating as calmness. There is something positively
brutal about the good temper of most modern men. I wonder we women stand
it as well as we do.

The truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as possible. Bad habit, by the
way, makes one very unpopular at the club ... with the older members.
They call it being conceited. Perhaps it is.

My own business always bores me to death. I prefer other people's.

Don't be led astray into the paths of virtue--that is the worst of
women. They always want one to be good. And if we are good, when they
meet us they don't love us at all. They like to find us quite
irretrievably bad and to leave us quite unattractively good.

Men are such cowards. They outrage every law in the world and are afraid
of the world's tongue.

Wicked women bother one. Good women bore one. That is the only
difference between them.

To know the principles of the highest art is to know the principles of
all the arts.

I don't believe in the existence of Puritan women. I don't think there
is a woman in the world who would not be a little flattered if one made
love to her. It is that which makes women so irresistibly adorable.

When I am in trouble eating is the only thing that consoles me. Indeed,
when I am in really great trouble, as anyone who knows me intimately
will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.

When one is going to lead an entirely new life one requires regular and
wholesome meals.

The soul is born old, but grows young. That is the comedy of life. The
body is born young, and grows old. That is life's tragedy.

One can survive everything nowadays except death, and live down anything
except a good reputation.

The past is of no importance. The present is of no importance. It is
with the future that we have to deal. For the past is what men should
not have been. The present is what men ought not to be. The future is
what artists are.

Men become old, but they never become good.

By persistently remaining single a man converts himself into a permanent
public temptation. Men should be more careful; this very celibacy leads
weaker vessels astray.

I think that in practical life there is something about success, actual
success, that is a little unscrupulous, something about ambition that is
scrupulous always.

Every man of ambition has to fight his century with its own weapons.
What this century worships is wealth. The god of this century is wealth.
To succeed one must have wealth. At all costs one must have wealth.

I love scandals about other people, but scandals about myself don't
interest me. They have not got the charm of novelty.

Moderation is a fatal thing. Enough is as bad as a meal. More than
enough is as good as a feast.

The English can't stand a man who is always saying he is in the right,
but they are very fond of a man who admits he has been in the wrong. It
is one of the best things in them.

Life is simply a 'mauvais quart d'heure' made up of exquisite moments.

There is the same world for all of us, and good and evil, sin and
innocence, go through it hand in hand. To shut one's eyes to half of
life that one may live securely is as though one blinded oneself that
one might walk with more safety in a land of pit and precipice.

Married men are horribly tedious when they are good husbands and
abominably conceited when they are not.

Between men and women there is no friendship possible. There is passion,
enmity, worship, love, but no friendship.

Everybody is clever nowadays. You can't go anywhere without meeting
clever people. This has become an absolute public nuisance.

I don't think man has much capacity for development. He has got as far
as he can, and that is not far, is it?

I am not quite sure that I quite know what pessimism really means. All I
do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity. It is love, and not German philosophy,
that is the explanation of this world, whatever may be the explanation
of the next.

I do not approve of anything that that tampers with natural arrogance.
Ignorance is like a delicate exotic fruit: touch it, and the blossom is
gone.

The whole theory of modern education is radically unsound. Fortunately,
in England, at any rate, education produces no effect whatsoever. If it
did it would prove a serious danger to the upper classes, and probably
lead to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square.

No woman should ever be quite accurate about her age. It looks so
calculating.

Emotion for the sake of emotion is the aim of art, and emotion for the
sake of emotion is the aim of life and of that practical organisation of
life that we call society.

Men of the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to
the influence of the physical charms of others. Modern, no less than
ancient, history supplies us with many most painful examples of what I
refer to. If it were not so, indeed, history would be quite unreadable.

I am not in favour of long engagements. They give people the opportunity
of finding out each other's character before marriage, which I think is
never advisable.

It is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life
he has been speaking nothing but the truth.

The two weak points in our age are its want of principle and its want of
profile.

Thirty-five is a very attractive age. London society is full of women
who have of their own free choice remained thirty-five for years.

Never speak disrespectfully of society. Only people who can't get into
it do that.

It is always painful to part with people whom one has known for a very
brief space of time. The absence of old friends one can endure with
equanimity. But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one has
just been introduced is almost unbearable.

To be natural is to be obvious, and to be obvious is to be inartistic.

One is tempted to define man as a rational animal who always loses his
temper when he is called upon to act in accordance with the dictates of
reason.

The essence of thought, as the essence of life, is growth.

What people call insincerity is simply a method by which we can multiply
our personalities.

In a temple everyone should be serious except the thing that is
worshipped.

We are never more true to ourselves than when we are inconsistent.

There is always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom
one has ceased to love.

Intellectual generalities are always interesting, but generalities in
morals mean absolutely nothing.

To be in society is merely a bore, but to be out of it simply a tragedy.

We live in an age when unnecessary things are our only necessities.

One should never make one's début with a scandal. One should reserve
that to give an interest to one's old age.

What man has sought for is, indeed, neither pain nor pleasure, but
simply life. Man has sought to live intensely, fully, perfectly. When he
can do so without exercising restraint on others, or suffering it ever,
and his activities are all pleasurable to him, he will be saner,
healthier, more civilised, more himself. Pleasure is nature's test, her
sign of approval. When man is happy he is in harmony with himself and
his environment.

Society often forgives the criminal, it never forgives the dreamer.

It is so easy for people to have sympathy with suffering. It is so
difficult for them to have sympathy with thought.

Conversation should touch on everything, but should concentrate itself
on nothing.

There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves we feel that
no one else has a right to blame us. It is the confession, not the
priest, that gives us absolution.

There are only two kinds of people who are really fascinating--people
who know absolutely everything and people who know absolutely nothing.

The public is wonderfully tolerant; it forgives everything except
genius.

Life makes us pay too high a price for its wares, and we purchase the
meanest of its secrets at a cost that is monstrous and infinite.

This horrid House of Commons quite ruins our husbands for us. I think
the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a happy married life that
there has been since that terrible thing they called the Higher
Education of Women was invented.

Once a man begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully
effeminate, does he not? And I don't like that. It makes men so very
attractive.

Experience is a question of instinct about life.

What is true about art is true about life.

One can always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.

I like men who have a future and women who have a past.

Women, as some witty Frenchman put it, inspire us with the desire to do
masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out.

In matters of grave importance style, not sincerity, is the vital thing.

The only way to behave to a woman, is to make love to her if she is
pretty and to someone else if she is plain.

Women give to men the very gold of their lives. Possibly; but they
invariably want it back in such very small change.

Define women as a sex? Sphinxes without secrets.

What do you call a bad man? The sort of man who admires innocence.

What do you call a bad woman? Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets
tired of.

One can resist everything except temptation.

Don't let us go to life for our fulfilment or our experience. It is a
thing narrowed by circumstances, incoherent in its utterance, and
without that fine correspondence or form and spirit which is the only
thing that can satisfy the artistic and critical temperament.

It is a dangerous thing to reform anyone.

One can always know at once whether a man has home claims upon his life
or not. I have noticed a very, very sad expression in the eyes of so
many married men.

A mother who doesn't part with a daughter every season has no real
affection.

To be good is to be in harmony with oneself. Discord is to be forced to
be in harmony with others.

A really grand passion is comparatively rare nowadays. It is the
privilege of people who have nothing to do. That is the one use of the
idle classes in a country.

There is no secret of life. Life's aim, if it has one, is simply to be
always looking for temptations. There are not nearly enough of them; I
sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a single one. It is
quite dreadful. It makes one so nervous about the future.

All thought is immoral. Its very essence is destruction. If you think of
anything you kill it; nothing survives being thought of.

What is truth? In matters of religion it is simply the opinion that has
survived. In matters of science it is the ultimate sensation. In matters
of art it is one's last mood.

It is so easy to convert others. It is so difficult to convert oneself.

A little sincerity is a dangerous thing, and a great deal of it is
absolutely fatal.

Life cheats us with shadows, like a puppet-master. We ask it for
pleasure. It gives it to us, with bitterness and disappointment in its
train. We come across some noble grief that we think will lend the
purple dignity of tragedy to our days, but it passes away from us, and
things less noble take its place, and on some grey, windy dawn, or
odorous eve of silence and of silver, we find ourselves looking with
callous wonder, or dull heart of stone, at the tress of gold-flecked
hair that we had once so wildly worshipped and so madly kissed.

There are two ways of disliking art One is to dislike it and the other
to like it rationally.

There is nothing sane about the worship of beauty. It is too splendid to
be sane. Those of whose lives it forms the dominant note will always
seem to the world to be mere visionaries.

I am afraid that good people do a great deal of harm in this world.
Certainly the greatest harm they do is that they make badness of such
extraordinary importance.

A sentimentalist is a man who sees an absurd value in everything and
doesn't know the marked price of any single thing.

Punctuality is the thief of time.

Self-culture is the true ideal for man.

There's nothing in the world like the devotion of a married woman. It's
a thing no married man knows anything about.

No woman should have a memory. Memory in a woman is the beginning of
dowdiness. One can always tell from a woman's bonnet whether she has got
a memory or not.

There are things that are right to say but that may be said at the wrong
time and to the wrong people.

The meaning of any beautiful created thing is, at least, as much in the
soul of him who looks at it as it was in his soul who wrought it. Nay,
it is rather the beholder who lends to the beautiful thing its myriad
meanings, and makes it marvellous for us, and sets it in some new
relation to the age, so that it becomes a vital portion of our lives and
a symbol of what we pray for, or perhaps of what, having prayed for, we
fear that we may receive.

The Renaissance was great because it sought to solve no social problem,
and busied itself not about such things, but suffered the individual to
develop freely, beautifully, and naturally, and so had great and
individual artists and great and individual men.

In England people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast. That is so
dreadful of them! Only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.

When one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself, and one ends by
deceiving others. That is what the world calls a romance.

The secret of life is never to have an emotion that is unbecoming.

No artist is ever morbid. The artist can express everything.

The development of the race depends on the development of the
individual, and where self-culture has ceased to be the ideal the
intellectual standard is instantly lowered and often ultimately lost.

An idea that is not dangerous is unworthy of being called an idea at
all.

To elope is cowardly; it is running away from danger, and danger has
become so rare in modern life.

When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old enough to do right
also.

The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden. It ends with
Revelations.

In married life three is company and two is none.

Out of ourselves we can never pass, nor can there be in creation what in
the creator was not.

Don't tell me that you have exhausted life. When a man says that one
knows that life has exhausted him.

When a woman marries again it is because she detested her first husband.
When a man marries again it is because he adored his first wife. Women
try their luck; men risk theirs.

The highest criticism really is the record of one's own soul. It is more
fascinating than history, as it is concerned simply with oneself. It is
more delightful than philosophy, as its subject is concrete and not
abstract, real and not vague. It is the only civilised form of
autobiography, as it deals, not with the events, but with the thoughts
of one's life, not with life's physical accidents of deed or
circumstance, but with the spiritual moods and imaginative passions of
the mind.

To know anything about oneself one must know all about others.

Duty is what one expects from others, it is not what one does oneself.

After a good dinner one can forgive anybody, even one's own relations.

Talk to every woman as if you loved her and to every man as if he bored
you, and at the end of your first season you will have the reputation of
possessing the most perfect social tact.

Man--poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man--belongs to a sex that has
been rational for millions and millions of years. He can't help himself;
it is in his race. The history of women is very different. They have
always been picturesque protests against the mere existence of
common-sense; they saw its dangers from the first.

More marriages are ruined nowadays by the common-sense of the husband
than by anything else. How can a woman be expected to be happy with a
man who insists on treating her as if she were a perfectly rational
being.

It is very vulgar to talk about one's business. Only people like
stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner-parties.

It is awfully hard work doing nothing. However, I don't mind hard work
when there is no definite object of any kind.

To do nothing at all is the most difficult thing in the world, the most
difficult and the most intellectual. To Plato, with his passion for
wisdom, this was the noblest form of energy.

To Aristotle, with his passion for knowledge, this was the noblest form
of energy also. It was to this that the passion for holiness led the
saint and the mystic of mediæval days.

Youth! There is nothing like it. It is absurd to talk of the ignorance
of youth. The only people to whose opinions I listen now with any
respect are persons much younger than myself. They seem in front of me.
Life has revealed to them her latest wonder.

Romance lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an
art.

I adore simple pleasures. They are the last refuge of the complex.

There is nothing like youth. The middle-aged are mortgaged to life. The
old are in life's lumber-room. But youth is the lord of life. Youth has
a kingdom waiting for it. Everyone is born a king, and most people die
in exile--like most kings.

All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.

Society, civilised society at least, is never very ready to believe
anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating. It
instinctively feels that manners are of more importance than morals, and
in its opinion the highest respectability is of much less value than the
possession of a good chef. And, after all, it is a very poor consolation
to be told that the man who has given one a bad dinner or poor wine is
irreproachable in his private life. Even the cardinal virtues cannot
atone for half-cold entrees.

While, in the opinion of society, contemplation is the gravest thing of
which any citizen can be guilty, in the opinion of the highest culture
it is the proper occupation of man.

Life is terribly deficient in form. Its catastrophes happen in the wrong
way and to the wrong people. There is a grotesque horror about its
comedies, and its tragedies seem to culminate in farce. One is always
wounded when one approaches it. Things last either too long or not long
enough.

If a woman wants to hold a man she has merely to appeal to what is worst
in him.

We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars.

Beauty has as many meanings as man has moods. It is the symbol of
symbols. It reveals everything, because it expresses nothing. When it
shows us itself it shows us the whole fiery-coloured world.

Men always want to be a woman's first love. That is their clumsy vanity.
Women have a more subtle instinct about things. What they like is to be
a man's last romance.

Anything approaching to the free play of the mind is practically unknown
amongst us. People cry out against the sinner, yet it is not the sinful
but the stupid who are our shame. There is no sin except stupidity.

One regrets the loss even of one's worst habits. Perhaps one regrets
them the most. They are such an essential part of one's personality.

It is through art, and through art only, that we can realise our
perfection; through art and through art only, that we can shield
ourselves from the sordid perils of actual existence.

A man who can dominate a London dinner-table can dominate the world. The
future belongs to the dandy. It is the exquisites who are going to rule.

It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such an
inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their
absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack of
style. They affect us just as vulgarity affects us. They give us an
impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that. Sometimes,
however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of beauty crosses
our lives. If these elements of beauty are real the whole thing simply
appeals to our sense of dramatic effect. Suddenly we find that we are no
longer the actors but the spectators of the play. Or rather we are both.
We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder of the spectacle enthrals us.

When a woman finds out that her husband is absolutely indifferent to
her, she either becomes dreadfully dowdy or wears very smart bonnets
that some other woman's husband has to pay for.

It is immoral to use private property in order to alleviate the horrible
evils that result from the institution of private property.

It is a mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever
really shown in the work one creates. Art is always more abstract than
we fancy. Form and colour tell us of form and colour-that is all.

It is sometimes said that the tragedy of an artist's life is that he
cannot realise his ideal. But the true tragedy that dogs the steps of
most artists is that they realise their ideal too absolutely. For when
the ideal is realised it is robbed of its wonder and its mystery, and
becomes simply a new starting-point for an ideal that is other than
itself.

People who go in for being consistent have just as many moods as others
have. The only difference is that their moods are rather meaningless.

It is only shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion. A
man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent
a pleasure.

Good women have such a limited view of life, their horizon is so small,
their interests so petty. The fact is they are not modern, and to be
modern is the only thing worth being nowadays.

Discontent is the first step in the progress of a man or a nation.

Men marry because they are tired, women because they are curious. Both
are disappointed.

All men are married women's property. That is the only true definition
of what married women's property really is.

I am not in favour of this modern mania for turning bad people into good
people at a moment's notice. As a man sows so let him reap.

Nothing refines but the intellect.

It is very painful for me to be forced to speak the truth. It is the
first time in my life that I have ever been reduced to such a painful
position, and I am really quite inexperienced in doing anything of the
kind.

The man who regards his past is a man who deserves to have no future to
look forward to.

Just as it is only by contact with the art of foreign nations that the
art of a country gains that individual and separate life that we call
nationality, so, by curious inversion, it is only by intensifying his
own personality that the critic can interpret the personality of others;
and the more strongly this personality enters into the interpretation
the more real the interpretation becomes, the more satisfying, the more
convincing, and the more true.

Man is least himself when he talks in his own person. Give him a mask,
and he will tell you the truth.

All women become like their mothers: that is their tragedy. No man does:
that is his.

Women are a fascinatingly wilful sex. Every woman is a rebel, and
usually in wild revolt against herself.

One should always be in love. That is the reason one should never marry.

No man came across two ideal things. Few come across one.

To become the spectator of one's own life is to escape the suffering of
life.

The state is to make what is useful. The individual is to make what is
beautiful.

A community is infinitely more brutalised by the habitual employment of
punishment than it is by the occasional occurrence of crime.

The systems that fail are those that rely on the permanency of human
nature and not on its growth and development.

Jealousy, which is an extraordinary source of crime in modern life, is
an emotion closely bound up with our conceptions of property, and under
socialism and individualism will die out. It is remarkable that in
communistic tribes jealousy is entirely unknown.

All art is immoral.

He to whom the present is the only thing that is present knows nothing
of the age in which he lives. To realise the nineteenth century one must
realise every century that has preceded it and that has contributed to
its making.

Few parents nowadays pay any regard to what their children say to them.
The old-fashioned respect for the young is fast dying out.

The history of woman is the history of the worst form of tyranny the
world has ever known; the tyranny of the weak over the strong. It is the
only tyranny that lasts.

The happiness of a married man depends on the people he has not married.

There is no one type for man. There are as many perfections as there are
imperfect men. And while to the claims of charity a man may yield and
yet be free, to the claims of conformity no man may yield and remain
free at all.

A practical scheme is either a scheme that is already in existence or a
scheme that could be carried out under existing conditions.

All imitation in morals and in life is wrong.

The world has been made by fools that wise men may live in it.

Women love us for our defects. If we have enough of them they will
forgive us everything, even our gigantic intellects.

Society is a necessary thing. No man has any real success in this world
unless he has got women to back him--and women rule society. If you have
not got women on your side you are quite over. You might just as well be
a barrister or a stockbroker or a journalist at once.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried; men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are
conscious of sharing with the less highly organised forms of existence.
But it is probable the true nature of the senses has never been
understood, and that they have remained savage and animal merely because
the world has sought to starve them into submission or to kill them by
pain instead of aiming at making them elements of a new spirituality, of
which a fine instinct for beauty will be the dominant characteristic.

Women appreciate cruelty more than anything else. They have wonderfully
primitive instincts. We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves,
looking for their master all the same. They love being dominated.

Those who try to lead the people can only do so by following the mob. It
is through the voice of one crying in the wilderness that the way of the
gods must be prepared.

Circumstances are the lashes laid on to us by life. Some of us have to
receive them with bared ivory backs, and others are permitted to keep on
a coat--that is the only difference.

Criticism is itself an art.... It is no more to be judged by any low
standard of imitation or resemblance than is the work of poet or
sculptor. The critic occupies the same relation to the work of art that
he criticises as the artist does to the visible world of form and colour
or the unseen world of passion and thought. He does not even require for
the perfection of his art the finest materials. Anything will serve his
purpose.

It is very much more difficult to talk about a thing than to do it. In
the sphere of actual life that is, of course, obvious. Anybody can make
history, only a great man can write it.

If we lived long enough to see the results of our actions it may be that
those who call themselves good would be filled with a wild remorse and
those whom the world calls evil stirred with a noble joy. Each little
thing that we do passes into the great machine of life, which may grind
our virtues to powder and make them worthless or transform our sins into
elements of a new civilisation more marvellous and more splendid than
any that has gone before.

Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them, sometimes they forgive them.

We live in an age that reads too much to be wise and that thinks too
much to be beautiful.

One should absorb the colour of life, but one should never remember its
details. Details are always vulgar.

It will be a marvellous thing--the true personality of man--when we see
it. It will grow naturally and simply flowerlike, or as a tree grows. It
will not be at discord. It will never argue or dispute. It will not
prove things. It will know everything, and yet it will not busy itself
about knowledge. It will have wisdom. Its value will not be measured by
material things. It will have nothing, and yet it will have everything,
and whatever one takes from it it will still have, so rich it will be.
It will not be always meddling with others or asking them to be like
itself. It will love them because they will be different. And yet, while
it will not meddle with others, it will help all, as a beautiful thing
helps us, by being what it is. The personality of man will be very
wonderful. It will be as wonderful as the personality of a child.

Cynicism is merely the art of seeing things as they are instead of as
they ought to be.

Three addresses always inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.

If one doesn't talk about a thing it has never happened. It is simply
expression that gives reality to things.

No man is able who is unable to get on, just as no woman is clever who
can't succeed in obtaining that worst and most necessary of evils, a
husband.

The one charm of the past is that it is the past. But women never know
when the curtain has fallen. They always want a sixth act, and as soon
as the interest of the play is entirely over they propose to continue
it. If they were allowed their way every comedy would have a tragic
ending and every tragedy would culminate in a farce. They are charmingly
artificial, but they have no sense of art.

Each time that one loves is the only time that one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion. It merely
intensifies it.

The real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege of
the rich.

Human life is the one thing worth investigating. Compared to it there is
nothing else of any value. It is true that as one watches life in its
curious crucible of pain and pleasure one cannot wear over one's face a
mask of glass nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and
making the imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen
dreams. There are poisons so subtle that to know their properties one
has to sicken of them. There are maladies so strange that one has to
pass through them if one seeks to understand their nature. And yet what
a great reward one receives! How wonderful the whole world becomes to
one! To note the curious, hard logic of passion and the emotional,
coloured life of the intellect--to observe where they meet, and where
they separate, at what point they are in unison and at what point they
are in discord--there is a delight in that! What matter what the cost
is? One can never pay too high a price for any sensation.

There is only one class in the community that thinks more about money
than the rich, and that is the poor. The poor can think of nothing else.
That is the misery of being poor.

To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist--that is
all.

Personality is a very mysterious thing. A man cannot always be estimated
by what he does. He may keep the law, and yet be worthless. He may break
the law, and yet be fine. He may be bad without ever doing anything bad.
He may commit a sin against society, and yet realise through that sin
his true perfection.

Mediæval art is charming, but mediæval emotions are out of date. One can
use them in fiction, of course; but then the only things that one can
use in fiction are the only things that one has ceased to use in fact.

Man is complete in himself.

What is a cynic? A man who knows the price of everything and the value
of nothing.

It's the old, old story. Love--well, not at first sight--but love at the
end of the season, which is so much more satisfactory.

No nice girl should ever waltz with such particularly younger sons! It
looks so fast!

Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific laws.
Their origin is pure vanity. Their result is absolutely nil. They give
us now and then some of those luxurious, sterile emotions that have a
certain charm for the weak. That is all that can be said for them. They
are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they have no account.

What is the difference between literature and journalism? Journalism is
unreadable and literature is unread.

I hope you have not been leading a double life, pretending to be wicked
and being really good all the time. That would be hypocrisy.

My husband is a sort of promissory note; I am tired of meeting him.

Conscience makes egotists of us all.

Never trust a woman who wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman
over thirty-five who is fond of pink ribbons. It always means that they
have a history.

There is a fatality about good resolutions-they are always made too
late.

We can have in life but one great experience at best, and the secret of
life is to reproduce that experience as often as possible.

Anybody can be good in the country. There are no temptations there. That
is the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely
uncivilised. Civilisation is not by any means an easy thing to attain
to. There are only two ways by which man can reach it. One is by being
cultured, the other by being corrupt. Country people have no opportunity
of being either, so they stagnate.

What nonsense people talk about happy marriages! A man can be happy with
any woman so long as he does not love her.

The things one feels absolutely certain about are never true. That is
the fatality of faith and the lesson of romance.

In the common world of fact the wicked are not punished nor the good
rewarded. Success is given to the strong, failure thrust upon the weak.

Nothing should be able to harm a man except himself. Nothing should be
able to rob a man at all. What a man really has is what is in him. What
is outside of him should be a matter of no importance.

Modern morality consists in accepting the standard of one's age. I
consider that for any man of culture to accept the standard of his age
is a form of the grossest immorality.

Perplexity and mistrust fan affection into passion, and so bring about
those beautiful tragedies that alone make life worth living. Women once
felt this, while men did not, and so women once ruled the world.

Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's, face. It cannot be
concealed. People talk sometimes of secret vices. There are no such
things.

If a wretched man has a vice it shows itself in the lines of his mouth,
the drop of his eyelids, the moulding of his hands even.

There are sins whose fascination is more in the memory than in the doing
of them, strange triumphs that gratify the pride more than the passions
and give to the intellect a quickened sense of joy, greater than they
bring or can ever bring to the senses.

No civilised man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilised man ever
knows what a pleasure is.

As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but one whose growth is
arrested. If you want to mar a nature you have merely to reform it.

Socialism itself will be of value simply because it will lead to
individualism.

Some years ago people went about the country saying that property has
duties. It is perfectly true. Property not merely has duties, but has so
many duties that its possession to any large extent is a bore. If
property had simply pleasures we could stand it, but its duties make it
unbearable.

It is through joy that the individualism of the future will develop
itself. Christ made no attempt to reconstruct society, and consequently
the individualism that He preached to man could be realised only through
pain or in solitude.

Most people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the
prose of life. To have ruined oneself over poetry is an honour.

The only artists I have ever known who are personally delightful are bad
artists. Good artists exist simply on what they make, and consequently
are perfectly uninteresting in what they are.

What are the virtues? Nature, Renan tells us, cares little about
chastity, and it may be that it is to the shame of the Magdalen, and not
to their own purity, that the Lucretias of modern life owe their freedom
from stain. Charity, as even those of whose religion it makes a formal
part have been compelled to acknowledge, creates a multitude of evils.
The mere existence of conscience, that faculty of which people prate so
much nowadays, and are so ignorantly proud, is a sign of our imperfect
development. It must be merged in instinct before we become fine.
Self-denial is simply a method by which man arrests his progress, and
self-sacrifice a survival of the mutilation of the savage, part of that
old worship of pain which is so terrible a factor in the history of the
world, and which even now makes its victims day by day and has its
altars in the land. Virtues! Who knows what the virtues are? Not you.
Not I. Not anyone. It is well for our vanity that we slay the criminal,
for if we suffered him to live he might show us what we had gained by
his crime. It is well for his peace that the saint goes to his
martyrdom. He is spared the sight of the horror of his harvest.

Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors and all the bachelors
like married men.

The higher education of men is what I should like to see. Men need it so
sadly.

The world is perfectly packed with good women. To know them is a
middle-class education.

Hesitation of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of
physical weakness in the old.

Our husbands never appreciate anything in us. We have to go to others
for that.

Most women in London nowadays seem to furnish their rooms with nothing
but orchids, foreigners and French novels.

The canons of good society are, or should be, the same as the canons of
art. Form is absolutely essential to it. It should have the dignity of a
ceremony as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere
character of a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such
plays delightful to us. Is sincerity such a terrible thing? I think not.
It is merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

The tragedy of old age is not that one is old but that one is young.

A great poet, a really great poet, is the most unpoetical of all
creatures. But inferior poets are absolutely fascinating. The worse
their rhymes are the more picturesque they look. The mere fact of having
published a book of second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.
He lives the poetry that he cannot write. The others write the poetry
that they dare not realise.

Being adored is a nuisance. Women treat us just as humanity treats its
gods. They worship us, and are always bothering us to do something for
them.

If a man treats life artistically his brain is his heart.

The 'Peerage' is the one book a young man about town should know
thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the English have ever
done.

The world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only
way in which it has been able to bear them. Consequently whatever the
world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.

The only difference between the saint and the sinner is that every saint
has a past and every sinner has a future.

What is termed sin is an essential element of progress. Without it the
world would stagnate or grow old or becomes colourless. By its curiosity
it increases the experience of the race. Through its intensified
assertion of individualism it saves us from the commonplace. In its
rejection of the current notions about morality it is one with the
higher ethics.

Formerly we used to canonise our heroes. The modern method is to
vulgarise them. Cheap editions of great books may be delightful, but
cheap editions of great men are absolutely detestable.

Individualism does not come to man with any claims upon him at all. It
comes naturally and inevitably out of man. It is the point to which all
development tends. It is the differentiation to which all organisms
grow. It is the perfection that is inherent in every mode of life and
toward which every mode of life quickens. Individualism exercises no
compulsion over man. On the contrary, it says to man that he should
suffer no compulsion to be exercised over him. It does not try to force
people to be good. It knows that people are good when they are let
alone. Man will develop individualism out of himself. Man is now so
developing individualism. To ask whether individualism is practical is
like asking whether evolution is practical. Evolution is the law of
life, and there is no evolution except towards individualism.

The longer I live the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough
for our fathers is not good enough for us. In art, as in politics, 'les
grand pères ont toujours tort.'

No woman is a genius. Women are a decorative sex. They never have
anything to say but they say it charmingly.

Humanity takes itself too seriously. It is the world's original sin. If
the cave men had known how to laugh history would have been different.

I wonder who it was defined man as a rational animal. It was the most
premature definition ever given. Man is many things, but he is not
rational.

Thought and language are to the artist instruments of an art.

To get into the best society nowadays one has either to feed people,
amuse people, or shock people--that is all.

You should never try to understand women. Women are pictures, men are
problems. If you want to know what a woman really means--which, by the
way, is always a dangerous thing to do--look at her, don't listen to
her.

Ordinary women never appeal to one's imagination. They are limited to
their century. No glamour ever transfigures them. One knows their minds
as easily as one knows their bonnets. One can always find them. There is
no mystery in any of them. They ride in the park in the morning and
chatter at tea parties in the afternoon. They have their stereotyped
smile and their fashionable mauve.

Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces. There is an extraordinary
charm in them--sometimes.

To have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays. It shuts one
out from so much.

The people who have adored me--there have not been very many, but there
have been some--have always insisted on living on long after I had
ceased to care for them or they to care for me. They have become stout
and tedious, and when I meet them they go in at once for reminiscences.
That awful memory of women! What a fearful thing it is! And what an
utter intellectual stagnation it reveals!

Examinations are pure humbug from beginning to end. If a man is a
gentleman he knows quite enough, and if he is not a gentleman whatever
he knows is bad for him.

Credit is the capital of a younger son, and he can live charmingly on
it.

The object of art is not simply truth but complex beauty. Art itself is
really a form of exaggeration, and selection, which is the very spirit
of art, is nothing more than an intensified mode of over-emphasis.

The popular cry of our time is: 'Let us return to Life and Nature, they
will recreate Art for us and send the red blood coursing through her
veins; they will shoe her feet with swiftness and make her hand strong.'
But, alas! we are mistaken in our amiable and well-meant efforts. Nature
is always behind the age. And as for life, she is the solvent that
breaks up Art, the enemy that lays waste her house.

There are only two kinds of women--the plain and the coloured. The plain
women are very useful. If you want to gain a reputation for
respectability you have merely to take them down to supper. The other
women are very charming. They commit one mistake, however--they paint in
order to try and look young.

The way of paradoxes is the way of truth. To test reality we must see it
on the tight-rope. When the verities become acrobats we can judge them.

Life imitates art far more than art imitates life.... The Greeks with
their quick, artistic instinct understood this, and set in the bride's
chamber the statue of Hermes or of Apollo, that she might bear children
as lovely as the works of art that she looked at in her rapture or her
pain. They knew that life gains from art not merely spirituality, depth
of thought and feeling, soul-turmoil or soul-peace, but that she can
form herself on the very lines and colours of art, and can reproduce the
dignity of Pheidias as well as the grace of Praxiteles. Hence came this
objection to realism. They disliked it on purely social grounds. They
felt that it inevitably makes people ugly, and they were perfectly
right.

Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life of
the intellect--simply a confession of failure.

There are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid
that others might pick them up.

What a fuss people make about fidelity! Why, even in love it is purely a
question for physiology. It has nothing to do with our own will. Young
men want to be faithful and are not; old men want to be faithless and
cannot--that is all one can say.

Modernity of form and modernity of subject-matter are entirely and
absolutely wrong. We have mistaken the common livery of the age for the
vesture of the muses, and spent our days in the sordid streets and
hideous suburbs of our vile cities when we should be out on the hillside
with Apollo. Certainly we are a degraded race, and have sold our
birthright for a mess of facts.

Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the
senses but the soul.

I can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable. There is
something unfair about its use. It is hitting below the intellect.

Those who live in marble or on painted panel know of life but a single
exquisite instant, eternal, indeed, in its beauty but limited to one
note of passion or one mood of calm. Those whom the poet makes live have
their myriad emotions of joy and terror, of courage and despair, of
pleasure and of suffering. The seasons come and go in glad or saddening
pageant, and with winged or leaden feet the years pass by before them.
They have their youth and their manhood, they are children, and they
grow old. It is always dawn for St Helena as Veronese saw her at the
window. Through the still morning air the angels bring her the symbol of
God's pain. The cool breezes of the morning lift the gilt threads from
her brow. On that little hill by the city of Florence, where the lovers
of Giorgione are lying, it is always the solstice of noon--of noon made
so languorous by summer suns that hardly can the slim, naked girl dip
into the marble tank the round bubble of clear glass, and the long
fingers of the lute player rest idly upon the chords. It is twilight
always for the dancing nymphs whom Corot set free among the silver
poplars of France. In eternal twilight they move, those frail,
diaphanous figures, whose tremulous, white feet seem not to touch the
dew-drenched grass they tread on. But those who walk in epos, drama, or
romance see through the labouring months the young moons wax and wane,
and watch the night from evening into morning star, and from sunrise
into sun-setting can note the shifting day with all its gold and shadow.
For them, as for us, the flowers bloom and wither, and the earth, that
green-tressed goddess, as Coleridge calls her, alters her raiment for
their pleasure. The statue is concentrated to one moment of perfection.
The image stained upon the canvas possesses no spiritual element of
growth or change. If they know nothing of death it is because they know
little of life, for the secrets of life and death belong to those, and
to those only, whom the sequence of time affects, and who possess not
merely the present but the future, and can rise or fall from a past of
glory or of shame. Movement, that problem of the visible arts, can be
truly realised by literature alone. It is literature that shows us the
body in its swiftness and the soul in its unrest.

Behind every exquisite thing that exists there is something tragic.
Worlds have to be in travail that the merest flower may blow.

Beauty is a form of genius--is higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs
no explanation. It is one of the great facts of the world, like
sunlight, or spring-time, or the reflection in dark water of that silver
shell we call the moon. It cannot be questioned, it has its divine right
of sovereignty.

The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it. Resist it and
your soul grows sick with longing for the things it has forbidden to
itself.

Women spoil every romance by trying to make it last for ever.

He's sure to be a wonderful success. He thinks like a Tory and talks
like a Radical, and that's so important nowadays.

Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out.

We make gods of men and they leave us. Others make brutes of them and
they fawn and are faithful.

The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes.

To me beauty is the Wonder of wonders. It is only shallow people who do
not judge by appearances.

The true mystery of the world is the visible, not the invisible.

The thoroughly well-informed man is the modern ideal. And the mind of
the thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing. It is like a
bric-a-brac shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above
its proper value.

Women have no appreciation of good looks in men--at least good women
have none.

To influence a person is to give him one's own soul. He does not think
his natural thoughts or burn with his natural passions. His virtues are
not real to him. His sins, if there are such things as sins, are
borrowed. He becomes an echo of someone else's music, an actor of a part
that has not been written for him.

Those who are faithful know only the trivial side of love; it is the
faithless who know love's tragedies.

An artist should create beautiful things, but should put nothing of his
own life into them. We live in an age when men treat art as if it were
meant to be a form of autobiography. We have lost the abstract sense of
beauty.

A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies. I have not got
one who is a fool. They are all men of some intellectual power, and
consequently they all appreciate me.

The value of an idea has nothing whatever to do with the sincerity of
the man who expresses it.

I like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no
principles better than anything else in the world.

He who would lead a Christ-like life is he who is perfectly and
absolutely himself. He may be a great poet, or a great man of science;
or a young student at the university, or one who watches sheep upon a
moor; or a maker of dramas, like Shakespeare, or a thinker about God,
like Spinoza; or a child who plays in a garden, or a fisherman who
throws his nets into the sea. It does not matter what he is as long as
he realises the perfection of the soul that is within him.

The aim of life is self-development. To realise one's nature
perfectly--that is what each of us is here for.

There is no such thing as a good influence. All influence is
immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view.

Words have not merely music as sweet as that of viol and lute, colour as
rich and vivid as any that makes lovely for us the canvas of the
Venetian or the Spaniard, and plastic form no less sure and certain than
that which reveals itself in marble or in bronze, but thought and
passion and spirituality are theirs also--are theirs, indeed, alone.

There is nothing so absolutely pathetic as a really fine paradox. The
pun is the clown among jokes, the well-turned paradox is the polished
comedian, and the highest comedy verges upon tragedy, just as the
keenest edge of tragedy is often tempered by a subtle humour. Our minds
are shot with moods as a fabric is shot with colours, and our moods
often seem inappropriate. Everything that is true is inappropriate.

The longer one studies life and literature the more strongly one feels
that behind everything that is wonderful stands the individual, and that
it is not the moment that makes the man but the man who creates the age.

To know the vintage and quality of a wine one need not drink the whole
cask.

It is a sad thing to think of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts
longer than beauty. That accounts for the fact that we all take such
pains to over-educate ourselves.

The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world. They can sit
at their ease and gape at the play. If they know nothing of victory they
are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.

To have a capacity for a passion, and not to realise it is to make
oneself incomplete and limited.

Even in actual life egotism is not without its attractions. When people
talk to us about others they are usually dull. When they talk to us
about themselves they are nearly always interesting, and if one could
shut them up when they become wearisome as easily as one can shut up a
book of which one has grown wearied they would be perfect absolutely.

Every great man nowadays has his disciples and it is invariably Judas
who writes the biography.

Art finds her own perfection within, and not outside of, herself. She is
not to be judged by any external standard of resemblance. She is a veil
rather than a mirror. She has flowers that no forest knows of, birds
that no woodland possesses. She makes and unmakes many worlds, and can
draw the moon from heaven with a scarlet thread. Hers are the 'forms
more real than living man,' and hers the great archetypes, of which
things that have existence are but unfinished copies. Nature has, in her
eyes, no laws, no uniformity. She can work miracles at her will, and
when she calls monsters from the deep they come. She can bid the
almond-tree blossom in winter and send the snow upon the ripe cornfield.
At her word the frost lays its silver finger on the burning mouth of
June, and the winged lions creep out from the hollows of the Lydian
hills. The dryads peer from the thicket as she passes by, and the brown
fauns smile strangely at her when she comes near them. She has
hawk-faced gods that worship her, and the centaurs gallop at her side.

In literature mere egotism is delightful.

If we live for aims we blunt our emotions. If we live for aims we live
for one minute, for one day, for one year, instead of for every minute,
every day, every year. The moods of one's life are life's beauties. To
yield to all one's moods is to really live.

Many a young man starts in life with a natural gift for exaggeration
which, if nurtured in congenial and sympathetic surroundings, or by the
imitations of the best models, might grow into something really great
and wonderful. But, as a rule, he comes to nothing. He either falls into
careless habits of accuracy or takes to frequenting the society of the
aged and the well-informed. Both things are equally fatal to his
imagination.

The spirit of an age may be best expressed in the abstract ideal arts,
for the spirit itself is abstract and ideal.

As for believing things, I can believe anything provided that it is
quite incredible.

'Know thyself' was written over the portal of the antique world. Over
the portal of the new world 'Be thyself' shall be written. And the
message of Christ to man was simply: 'Be thyself.' That is the secret of
Christ.

London is full of women who trust their husbands. One can always
recognise them, they look so thoroughly unhappy.

For those who are not artists, and to whom there is no mode of life but
the actual life of fact, pain is the only door to perfection.

The English public always feels perfectly at its ease when a mediocrity
is talking to it.

Men always fall into the absurdity of endeavouring to develop the mind,
to push it violently forward in this direction or in that. The mind
should be receptive, a harp waiting to catch the winds, a pool ready to
be ruffled, not a bustling busybody for ever trotting about on the
pavement looking for a new bun shop.

There is nothing more beautiful than to forget, except, perhaps, to be
forgotten.

All bad art comes from returning to life and nature, and elevating them
into ideals. Life and nature may sometimes be used as part of art's
rough material, but before they are of any real service to art they must
be translated into artistic conventions. The moment art surrenders its
imaginative medium it surrenders everything. As a method realism is a
complete failure, and the two things that every artist should avoid are
modernity of form and modernity of subject-matter.

Men may have women's minds just as women may have the minds of men.

London is too full of fogs and serious people. Whether the fogs produce
the serious people or whether the serious people produce the fogs I
don't know.

How marriage ruins a man! It's as demoralising as cigarettes, and far
more expensive.

He must be quite respectable. One has never heard his name before in the
whole course of one's life, which speaks volumes for a man nowadays.

Literature always anticipates life. It does not copy it, but moulds it
to its purpose.

As long as a thing is useful or necessary to us or affects us in any
way, either for pain or pleasure, or appeals strongly to our sympathies
or is a vital part of the environment in which we live, it is outside
the proper sphere of art.

I couldn't have a scene in this bonnet: it is far too fragile. A harsh
word would ruin it.

Music creates for one a past of which one has been ignorant and fills
one with a sense of sorrows that have been hidden from one's tears.

Nothing is so fatal to personality as deliberation.

I adore London dinner parties. The clever people never listen and the
stupid people never talk.

Learned conversation is either the affection of the ignorant or the
profession of the mentally unemployed.

The Academy is too large and too vulgar. Whenever I have gone there,
there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see
the pictures--which was dreadful, or so many pictures that I have not
been able to see the people--which was worse.

All art is quite useless.

Beauty, real beauty, ends where an intellectual expression begins.
Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration and destroys the harmony
of any face. The moment one sits down to think one becomes all nose or
all forehead or something horrid.

The one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception
absolutely necessary for both parties.

Secrecy seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious
or marvellous to us. The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides
it.

Conceit is one of the greatest of the virtues, yet how few people
recognise it as a thing to aim at and to strive after. In conceit many a
man and woman has found salvation, yet the average person goes on
all-fours grovelling after modesty.

It is difficult not to be unjust to what one loves.

Humanity will always love Rousseau for having confessed his sins not to
a friend but to the world.

Just as those who do not love Plato more than truth cannot pass beyond
the threshold of the Academe, so those who do not love beauty more than
truth never know the inmost shrine of art.

There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction: the
sort of fatality that seems to dog, through history, the faltering steps
of kings. It is better not to be different from one's fellows.

To be born, or at any rate bred, in a handbag, whether it had handles or
not, seems to me to display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of
family life that reminds one of the worst excesses of the French
Revolution.

Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for an art.

There must be a new Hedonism that shall recreate life and save it from
that harsh, uncomely Puritanism that is having, in our own day, its
curious revival. It must have its service of the intellect, certainly,
yet it must never accept any theory or system that will involve the
sacrifice of any mode of passionate experience. Its aim, indeed, is to
be experience itself and not the fruits of experience, bitter or sweet
as they may be. Of the æstheticism that deadens the senses, as of the
vulgar profligacy that dulls them, it is to know nothing. But it is to
teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but a moment.

Art never expresses anything but itself. It has an independent life,
just as thought has, and develops purely on its own lines. It is not
necessarily realistic in an age of realism nor spiritual in an age of
faith. So far from being the creation of its time it is usually in
direct opposition to it, and the only history that it preserves for us
is the history of its own progress.

People who mean well always do badly. They are like the ladies who wear
clothes that don't fit them in order to show their piety. Good
intentions are invariably ungrammatical.

Man can believe the impossible, but man can never believe the
improbable.

When art is more varied nature will, no doubt, be more varied also.

If a man is sufficiently imaginative to produce evidence in support of a
lie he might just as well speak the truth at once.

The ancient historians gave us delightful fiction in the form of fact;
the modern novelist presents us with dull facts under the guise of
fiction.

Nature is no great mother who has home us. She is our own creation. It
is in our brain that she quickens to life. Things are because we see
them, and what we see and how we see it depends on the arts that have
influenced us. To look at a thing is very different from seeing a thing.
One does not see anything until one sees its beauty.

The proper school to learn art in is not life but art.

I won't tell you that the world matters nothing, or the world's voice,
or the voice of society. They matter a good deal. They matter far too
much.

I wouldn't marry a man with a future before him for anything under the
sun.

I am the only person in the world I should like to know thoroughly, but
I don't see any chance of it just at present.

Modern memoirs are generally written by people who have entirely lost
their memories and have never done anything worth recording.

Education is an admirable thing, but it is well to remember from time to
time that nothing that is worth knowing can be taught.

Women are like minors, they live upon their expectations.

Twisted minds are as natural to some people as twisted bodies.

It is the very passions about whose origin we deceive ourselves that
tyrannise most strongly over us. Our weakest motives are those of whose
nature we are conscious. It often happens that when we think we are
experimenting on others we are really experimenting on ourselves.

Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing it is always from the
noblest motives.

I thought I had no heart. I find I have, and a heart doesn't suit me.
Somehow it doesn't go with modern dress. It makes one look old, and it
spoils one's career at critical moments.

I don't play accurately--anyone can play accurately--but I play with
wonderful expression. As far as the piano is concerned sentiment is my
forte. I keep science for life.

I delight in men over seventy. They always offer one the devotion of a
lifetime.

Everybody who is incapable of learning has taken to teaching--that is
really what our enthusiasm for education has come to.

Nature hates mind.

From the point of view of form the type of all the arts is the art of
the musician. From the point of view of feeling the actor's craft is the
type.

Where we differ from each other is purely in accidentals--in dress,
manner, tone of voice, religious opinions, personal appearance, tricks
of habit, and the like.

The more we study art the less we care for Nature. What art really
reveals to us is Nature's lack of design, her curious crudities, her
extraordinary monotony, her absolutely unfinished condition.... It is
fortunate for us, however, that nature is so imperfect, as otherwise we
should have had no art at all. Art is our spirited protest, our gallant
attempt to teach Nature her proper place. As for the infinite variety of
nature, that is a pure myth. It is not to be found in Nature herself. It
resides in the imagination or fancy or cultivated blindness of the man
who looks at her.

Facts are not merely finding a footing-place in history but they are
usurping the domain of fancy and have invaded the kingdom of romance.
Their chilling touch is over everything. They are vulgarising mankind.

Ordinary people wait till life discloses to them its secrets, but to the
few, to the elect, the mysteries of life are revealed before the veil is
drawn away. Sometimes this is the effect of art, and chiefly of the art
of literature which deals immediately with the passions and the
intellect. But now and then a complex personality takes the place and
assumes the office of art, is, indeed, in its way a real work of art,
Life having its elaborate masterpieces just as poetry has, or sculpture,
or painting.

Thinking is the most unhealthy thing in the world, and people die of it
just as they die of any other disease.

A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure. It is exquisite
and it leaves one unsatisfied.

The aim of the liar is simply to charm, to delight, to give pleasure. He
is the very basis of civilised society.

It is quite a mistake to believe, as many people do, that the mind shows
itself in the face. Vice may sometimes write itself in lines and changes
of contour, but that is all. Our faces are really masks given to us to
conceal our minds with.

What on earth should we men do going about with purity and innocence? A
carefully thought-out buttonhole is much more effective.

The only difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the
caprice lasts a little longer.

People say sometimes that beauty is only superficial. That may be so,
but at least it is not so superficial as thought is.

It is the spectator and not life that art really mirrors.

Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing.

Conscience and cowardice are really the same things. Conscience is the
trade name of the firm--that is all.

In every sphere of life form is the beginning of things. The rhythmic,
harmonious gestures of dancing convey, Plato tells us, both rhythm and
harmony into the mind. Forms are the food of faith, cried Newman, in one
of those great moments of sincerity that make us admire and know the
man. He was right, though he may not have known how terribly right he
was. The creeds are believed not because they are rational but because
they are repeated. Yes; form is everything. It is the secret of life.
Find expression for a sorrow and it will become dear to you. Find
expression for a joy and you intensify its ecstasy. Do you wish to love?
Use love's litany and the words will create the yearning from which the
world fancies that they spring. Have you a grief that corrodes your
heart? Learn its utterance from Prince Hamlet and Queen Constance and
you will find that mere expression is a mode of consolation and that
form, which is the birth of passion, is also the death of pain. And so,
to return to the sphere of art, it is form that creates not merely the
critical temperament but also the æsthetic instinct that reveals to one
all things under the condition of beauty. Start with the worship of form
and there is no secret in art that will not be revealed to you.

It is only the intellectually lost who ever argue.

Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common-sense, and
discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are
one's mistakes.

Lady Henry Wotton was a curious woman, whose dresses always looked as if
they had been designed in a rage and put on in a tempest. She was
usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion was never returned,
she had kept all her illusions. She tried to look picturesque but only
succeeded in being untidy.

Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.

With an evening coat and a white tie anybody, even a stockbroker, can
gain a reputation for being civilised.

There is nothing so interesting as telling a good man or woman how bad
one has been. It is intellectually fascinating. One of the greatest
pleasures of having been wicked is that one has so much to say to the
good.

Laws are made in order that people in authority may not remember them,
just as marriages are made in order that the divorce court may not play
about idly.

To get back one's youth one has merely to repeat one's follies.

Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair. They are so sentimental.

The reason we all like to think so well of others is that we are all
afraid for ourselves. The basis of optimism is sheer terror. We think
that we are generous because we credit our neighbours with the
possession of those virtues that are likely to be a benefit to us. We
praise the banker that we may overdraw our account, and find good
qualities in the high-wayman in the hope that he may spare our pockets.
I have the greatest contempt for optimism.

Art begins with abstract decoration, with purely imaginative and
pleasureable work dealing with what is unreal and non-existent. This is
the first stage. Then life becomes fascinated with this new wonder, and
asks to be admitted into the charmed circle. Art takes life as part of
her rough material, recreates it and refashions it in fresh form; is
absolutely indifferent to facts; invents, imagines, dreams, and keeps
between herself and reality the impenetrable barrier of beautiful style,
of decorative or ideal treatment. The third stage is when Life gets the
upper hand and drives Art out into the wilderness. This is the true
decadence, and it is from this that we are now suffering.

Good intentions have been the ruin of the world. The only people who
have achieved anything have been those who have had no intentions at
all.

I never take any notice of what common people say, and I never interfere
with what charming people do.

You know I am not a champion of marriage. The real drawback to
marriage is that it makes one unselfish, and unselfish people are
colourless--they lack individuality. Still there are certain
temperaments that marriage makes more complex. They retain their
egotism, and add to it many other egos. They are forced to have more
than one life. They become more highly organised, and to be highly
organised is, I should fancy, the object of man's existence. Besides,
every experience is of value, and whatever one may say against marriage
it is certainly an experience.

Those who read the symbol do so at their peril.

I never talk during music--at least not during good music. If anyone
hears bad music it is one's duty to drown it in conversation.

When critics disagree the artist is in accord with himself.

Faith is the most plural thing I know. We are all supposed to believe in
the same thing in different ways. It is like eating out of the same dish
with different coloured spoons.

Experience is of no ethical value. It is merely the name men give to
their mistakes. Moralists have, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of
warning, have claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation
of character, have praised it as something that teaches us what to
follow and shows us what to avoid. But there is no motive power in
experience. It is as little of an active cause as conscience itself. All
that it really demonstrates is that our future will be the same as our
past and that the sin we have done once, and with loathing, we shall do
many times, and with joy.

Sensations are the details that build up the stories of our lives.

No artist has ethical sympathies. An ethical sympathy in an artist is an
unpardonable mannerism of style.

She looks like an 'edition de luxe' of a wicked French novel meant
specially for the English market.

I never knew what terror was before; I know it now. It is as if a hand
of ice were laid upon one's heart. It is as if one's heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

We can forgive a man for making a useful thing as long as he does not
admire it. The only excuse for making a useless thing is that one
admires it intensely.

No artist desires to prove anything. Even things that are true can be
proved.

One knows so well the popular idea of health. The English country
gentleman galloping along after a fox--the unspeakable in pursuit of the
uneatable.

People seldom tell the truths that are worth telling. We ought to choose
our truths as carefully as we choose our lies and to select our virtues
with as much thought as we bestow upon the selection of our enemies.

Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they are! There is
animalism in the soul, and the body has its moments of spirituality. The
senses can refine and the intellect can degrade. Who can say where the
fleshly impulse ceases or the psychical impulse begins? How shallow are
the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists! And yet how
difficult to decide between the claims of the various schools! Is the
soul a shadow seated in the house of sin? Or is the body really in the
soul, as Giordano Bruno thought? The separation of spirit from matter is
a mystery, and the unison of spirit with matter is a mystery also.

Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the
cultivated. For these there is hope.

There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well
written or badly written-that is all.

Marriage is a sort of forcing house. It brings strange sins to fruit,
and sometimes strange renunciations.

The moral life of man forms part of the subject-matter of the artist,
but the morality of art consists in the perfect use of an imperfect
medium.

A sense of duty is like some horrible disease. It destroys the tissues
of the mind, as certain complaints destroy the tissues of the body. The
catechism has a great deal to answer for.

They are the elect to whom beautiful things mean only beauty.

Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without
being charming. This is a fault.

Few people have sufficient strength to resist the preposterous claims of
orthodoxy.

She wore far too much rouge last night and not quite enough clothes.
That is always a sign of despair in a woman.

A virtue is like a city set upon a hill--it cannot be hid. We can
conceal our vices if we care to--for a time at least--but a virtue will
out.

Can't make out how you stand London society. The thing has gone to the
dogs: a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

You don't know what an existence they lead down there. It is pure,
unadulterated country life. They get up early because they have so much
to do, and go to bed early because they have so little to think about.

Nothing is so fatal to a personality as the keeping of promises, unless
it be telling the truth.

Who cares whether Mr Ruskin's views on Turner are sound or not? What
does it matter? That mighty and majestic prose of his, so fervid and so
fiery coloured in its noble eloquence, so rich in its elaborate
symphonic music, so sure and certain, at its best, in subtle choice of
word and epithet, is, at least, as great a work of art as any of those
wonderful sunsets that bleach or rot on their corrupted canvases in
England's gallery--greater, indeed, one is apt to think at times, not
merely because its equal beauty is more enduring but on account of the
fuller variety of its appeal--soul speaking to soul in those long,
cadenced lines, not through form and colour alone, though through these,
indeed, completely and without loss, but with intellectual and emotional
utterance, with lofty passion and with loftier thought, with imaginative
insight and with poetic aim--greater, I always think, even as literature
is the greater art.

Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far
the best ending for one.

Mrs Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a
new scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park
every afternoon at 5.30. I am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can't manage to have enough of
them.

The world divides actions into three classes: good actions, bad actions
that you may do, and bad actions that you may not do. If you stick to
the good actions you are respected by the good. If you stick to the bad
actions that you may do you are respected by the bad. But if you perform
the bad actions that no one may do then the good and the bad set upon
you and you are lost indeed.

I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their
good characters, and my enemies for their good intellects.

The artist is the creator of beautiful things.

To me the word 'natural' means all that is middle class, all that is of
the essence of Jingoism, all that is colourless and without form and
void. It might be a beautiful word, but it is the most debased coin in
the currency of language.

I pity any woman who is married to a man called John. She would probably
never be allowed to know the entrancing pleasure of a single moment's
solitude.

It is only when we have learned to love forgetfulness that we have
learned the art of living.

To reveal art and conceal the artist is art's aim.

The world taken 'en masse' is a monster, crammed with prejudices, packed
with prepossessions, cankered with what it calls virtues, a Puritan, a
prig. And the art of life is the art of defiance. To defy--that is what
we ought to live for, instead of living, as we do, to acquiesce.

Some resemblance the creative work of the critic will have to the work
that has stirred him to creation, but it will be such resemblance as
exists, not between nature and the mirror that the painter of landscape
or figure may be supposed to hold up to her, but between nature and the
work of the decorative artist. Just as on the flowerless carpets of
Persia tulip and rose blossom indeed, and are lovely to look on, though
they are not reproduced in visible shape or line; just as the pearl and
purple of the sea shell is echoed in the church of St Mark at Venice;
just as the vaulted ceiling of the wondrous chapel at Ravenna is made
gorgeous by the gold and green and sapphire of the peacock's tail,
though the birds of Juno fly not across it; so the critic reproduces the
work that he criticises in a mode that is never imitative, and part of
whose charm may really consist in the rejection of resemblance, and
shows us in this way not merely the meaning but also the mystery of
beauty, and by transforming each art into literature solves once for all
the problem of art's unity.

Diversity of opinion about a work of art shows that the work is new,
complex, and vital.


Nothing is more painful to me than to come across virtue in a person in
whom I have never suspected its existence. It is like finding a needle
in a bundle of hay. It pricks you. If we have virtue we should warn
people of it.

The critic is he who can translate into another manner or a new material
his impression of beautiful things.

Hopper is one of nature's gentlemen--the worst type of gentleman I
know.

If one intends to be good one must take it up as a profession. It is
quite the most engrossing one in the world.

I like Wagner's music better than anybody's. It is so loud that one can
talk the whole time without other people hearing what one says.

All art is at once surface and symbol.

Childhood is one long career of innocent eavesdropping, of hearing what
one ought not to hear.

The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.

The only things worth saying are those that we forget, just as the only
things worth doing are those that the world is surprised at.

Maturity is one long career of saying what one ought not to say. That is
the art of conversation.

Virtue is generally merely a form of deficiency, just as vice is an
assertion of intellect.

People teach in order to conceal their ignorance, as people smile in
order to conceal their tears.

To be unnatural is often to be great. To be natural is generally to be
stupid.

To lie finely is an art, to tell the truth is to act according to
nature.

People who talk sense are like people who break stones in the road: they
cover one with dust and splinters.

Jesus said to man: You have a wonderful personality. Develop it. Be
yourself. Don't imagine that your perfection lies in accumulating or
possessing external things. Your perfection is inside of you. If only
you could realise that you would not want to be rich. Ordinary riches
can be stolen from a man, real riches cannot. In the treasury-house of
your soul there are infinitely precious things that may not be taken
from you. Try to so shape your life that external things will not harm
you, and try also to get rid of personal property. It involves sordid
preoccupation, endless industry, continual wrong. Personal property
hinders individualism at every step.

When Jesus talks about the poor He simply means personalities, just as
when He talks about the rich He simply means people who have not
developed their personalities.

An echo is often more beautiful than the voice it repeats.
As one enters Rome from the Via Ostiensis by the Porta San Paolo, the
first object that meets the eye is a marble pyramid which stands close at
hand on the left.

There are many Egyptian obelisks in Rome—tall, snakelike spires of red
sandstone, mottled with strange writings, which remind us of the pillars
of flame which led the children of Israel through the desert away from
the land of the Pharaohs; but more wonderful than these to look upon is
this gaunt, wedge-shaped pyramid standing here in this Italian city,
unshattered amid the ruins and wrecks of time, looking older than the
Eternal City itself, like terrible impassiveness turned to stone.  And so
in the Middle Ages men supposed this to be the sepulchre of Remus, who
was slain by his own brother at the founding of the city, so ancient and
mysterious it appears; but we have now, perhaps unfortunately, more
accurate information about it, and know that it is the tomb of one Caius
Cestius, a Roman gentleman of small note, who died about 30 B.C.

Yet though we cannot care much for the dead man who lies in lonely state
beneath it, and who is only known to the world through his sepulchre,
still this pyramid will be ever dear to the eyes of all English-speaking
people, because at evening its shadows fall on the tomb of one who walks
with Spenser, and Shakespeare, and Byron, and Shelley, and Elizabeth
Barrett Browning in the great procession of the sweet singers of England.

For at its foot there is a green sunny slope, known as the Old Protestant
Cemetery, and on this a common-looking grave, which bears the following
inscription:

And the name of the young English poet is John Keats.

Lord Houghton calls this cemetery ‘one of the most beautiful spots on
which the eye and heart of man can rest,’ and Shelley speaks of it as
making one ‘in love with death, to think that one should be buried in so
sweet a place’; and indeed when I saw the violets and the daisies and the
poppies that overgrow the tomb, I remembered how the dead poet had once
told his friend that he thought the ‘intensest pleasure he had received
in life was in watching the growth of flowers,’ and how another time,
after lying a while quite still, he murmured in some strange prescience
of early death, ‘I feel the flowers growing over me.’

But this time-worn stone and these wildflowers are but poor memorials {2}
of one so great as Keats; most of all, too, in this city of Rome, which
pays such honour to her dead; where popes, and emperors, and saints, and
cardinals lie hidden in ‘porphyry wombs,’ or couched in baths of jasper
and chalcedony and malachite, ablaze with precious stones and metals, and
tended with continual service.  For very noble is the site, and worthy of
a noble monument; behind looms the grey pyramid, symbol of the world’s
age, and filled with memories of the sphinx, and the lotus leaf, and the
glories of old Nile; in front is the Monte Testaccio, built, it is said,
with the broken fragments of the vessels in which all the nations of the
East and the West brought their tribute to Rome; and a little distance
off, along the slope of the hill under the Aurelian wall, some tall gaunt
cypresses rise, like burnt-out funeral torches, to mark the spot where
Shelley’s heart (that ‘heart of hearts’!) lies in the earth; and, above
all, the soil on which we tread is very Rome!

As I stood beside the mean grave of this divine boy, I thought of him as
of a Priest of Beauty slain before his time; and the vision of Guido’s
St. Sebastian came before my eyes as I saw him at Genoa, a lovely brown
boy, with crisp, clustering hair and red lips, bound by his evil enemies
to a tree, and though pierced by arrows, raising his eyes with divine,
impassioned gaze towards the Eternal Beauty of the opening heavens.  And
thus my thoughts shaped themselves to rhyme:

                              HEU MISERANDE PUER

    Rid of the world’s injustice and its pain,
       He rests at last beneath God’s veil of blue;
       Taken from life while life and love were new
    The youngest of the martyrs here is lain,
    Fair as Sebastian and as foully slain.
       No cypress shades his grave, nor funeral yew,
       But red-lipped daisies, violets drenched with dew,
    And sleepy poppies, catch the evening rain.

    O proudest heart that broke for misery!
       O saddest poet that the world hath seen!
          O sweetest singer of the English land!
          Thy name was writ in water on the sand,
       But our tears shall keep thy memory green,
    And make it flourish like a Basil-tree.

During my tour in America I happened one evening to find myself in
Louisville, Kentucky.  The subject I had selected to speak on was the
Mission of Art in the Nineteenth Century, and in the course of my lecture
I had occasion to quote Keats’s Sonnet on Blue as an example of the
poet’s delicate sense of colour-harmonies.  When my lecture was concluded
there came round to see me a lady of middle age, with a sweet gentle
manner and a most musical voice.  She introduced herself to me as Mrs.
Speed, the daughter of George Keats, and invited me to come and examine
the Keats manuscripts in her possession.  I spent most of the next day
with her, reading the letters of Keats to her father, some of which were
at that time unpublished, poring over torn yellow leaves and faded scraps
of paper, and wondering at the little Dante in which Keats had written
those marvellous notes on Milton.  Some months afterwards, when I was in
California, I received a letter from Mrs. Speed asking my acceptance of
the original manuscript of the sonnet which I had quoted in my lecture.
This manuscript I have had reproduced here, as it seems to me to possess
much psychological interest.  It shows us the conditions that preceded
the perfected form, the gradual growth, not of the conception but of the
expression, and the workings of that spirit of selection which is the
secret of style.  In the case of poetry, as in the case of the other
arts, what may appear to be simply technicalities of method are in their
essence spiritual not mechanical, and although, in all lovely work, what
concerns us is the ultimate form, not the conditions that necessitate
that form, yet the preference that precedes perfection, the evolution of
the beauty, and the mere making of the music, have, if not their artistic
value, at least their value to the artist.

It will be remembered that this sonnet was first published in 1848 by
Lord Houghton in his _Life_, _Letters_, _and Literary Remains of John
Keats_.  Lord Houghton does not definitely state where he found it, but
it was probably among the Keats manuscripts belonging to Mr. Charles
Brown.  It is evidently taken from a version later than that in my
possession, as it accepts all the corrections, and makes three
variations.  As in my manuscript the first line is torn away, I give the
sonnet here as it appears in Lord Houghton’s edition.

In the _Athenæum_ of the 3rd of June 1876 appeared a letter from Mr. A.
J. Horwood, stating that he had in his possession a copy of _The Garden
of Florence_ in which this sonnet was transcribed.  Mr. Horwood, who was
unaware that the sonnet had been already published by Lord Houghton,
gives the transcript at length.  His version reads _hue_ for _life_ in
the first line, and _bright_ for _wide_ in the second, and gives the
sixth line thus:

a foot too long: it also reads _to_ for _of_ in the ninth line.  Mr.
Buxton Forman is of opinion that these variations are decidedly genuine,
but indicative of an earlier state of the poem than that adopted in Lord
Houghton’s edition.  However, now that we have before us Keats’s first
draft of his sonnet, it is difficult to believe that the sixth line in
Mr. Horwood’s version is really a genuine variation.  Keats may have
written,

and the transcript may have been carelessly made, but having got his line
right in his first draft, Keats probably did not spoil it in his second.
The _Athenæum_ version inserts a comma after _art_ in the last line,
which seems to me a decided improvement, and eminently characteristic of
Keats’s method.  I am glad to see that Mr. Buxton Forman has adopted it.

As for the corrections that Lord Houghton’s version shows Keats to have
made in the eighth and ninth lines of this sonnet, it is evident that
they sprang from Keats’s reluctance to repeat the same word in
consecutive lines, except in cases where a word’s music or meaning was to
be emphasized.  The substitution of ‘its’ for ‘his’ in the sixth line is
more difficult of explanation.  It was due probably to a desire on
Keats’s part not to mar by any echo the fine personification of Hesperus.

It may be noticed that Keats’s own eyes were brown, and not blue, as
stated by Mrs. Proctor to Lord Houghton.  Mrs. Speed showed me a note to
that effect written by Mrs. George Keats on the margin of the page in
Lord Houghton’s _Life_ (p. 100, vol. i.), where Mrs. Proctor’s
description is given.  Cowden Clarke made a similar correction in his
_Recollections_, and in some of the later editions of Lord Houghton’s
book the word ‘blue’ is struck out.  In Severn’s portraits of Keats also
the eyes are given as brown.

The exquisite sense of colour expressed in the ninth and tenth lines may
be paralleled by

    The Ocean with its vastness, its blue green,

of the sonnet to George Keats.

A man can live for three days without bread, but no man can live for one
day without poetry, was an aphorism of Baudelaire.  You can live without
pictures and music but you cannot live without eating, says the author of
_Dinners and Dishes_; and this latter view is, no doubt, the more
popular.  Who, indeed, in these degenerate days would hesitate between an
ode and an omelette, a sonnet and a salmis?  Yet the position is not
entirely Philistine; cookery is an art; are not its principles the
subject of South Kensington lectures, and does not the Royal Academy give
a banquet once a year?  Besides, as the coming democracy will, no doubt,
insist on feeding us all on penny dinners, it is well that the laws of
cookery should be explained: for were the national meal burned, or badly
seasoned, or served up with the wrong sauce a dreadful revolution might
follow.

Under these circumstances we strongly recommend _Dinners and Dishes_ to
every one: it is brief and concise and makes no attempt at eloquence,
which is extremely fortunate.  For even on ortolans who could endure
oratory?  It also has the advantage of not being illustrated.  The
subject of a work of art has, of course, nothing to do with its beauty,
but still there is always something depressing about the coloured
lithograph of a leg of mutton.

As regards the author’s particular views, we entirely agree with him on
the important question of macaroni.  ‘Never,’ he says, ‘ask me to back a
bill for a man who has given me a macaroni pudding.’  Macaroni is
essentially a savoury dish and may be served with cheese or tomatoes but
never with sugar and milk.  There is also a useful description of how to
cook risotto—a delightful dish too rarely seen in England; an excellent
chapter on the different kinds of salads, which should be carefully
studied by those many hostesses whose imaginations never pass beyond
lettuce and beetroot; and actually a recipe for making Brussels sprouts
eatable.  The last is, of course, a masterpiece.

The real difficulty that we all have to face in life is not so much the
science of cookery as the stupidity of cooks.  And in this little
handbook to practical Epicureanism the tyrant of the English kitchen is
shown in her proper light.  Her entire ignorance of herbs, her passion
for extracts and essences, her total inability to make a soup which is
anything more than a combination of pepper and gravy, her inveterate
habit of sending up bread poultices with pheasants,—all these sins and
many others are ruthlessly unmasked by the author.  Ruthlessly and
rightly.  For the British cook is a foolish woman who should be turned
for her iniquities into a pillar of salt which she never knows how to
use.

But our author is not local merely.  He has been in many lands; he has
eaten back-hendl at Vienna and kulibatsch at St. Petersburg; he has had
the courage to face the buffalo veal of Roumania and to dine with a
German family at one o’clock; he has serious views on the right method of
cooking those famous white truffles of Turin of which Alexandre Dumas was
so fond; and, in the face of the Oriental Club, declares that Bombay
curry is better than the curry of Bengal.  In fact he seems to have had
experience of almost every kind of meal except the ‘square meal’ of the
Americans.  This he should study at once; there is a great field for the
philosophic epicure in the United States.  Boston beans may be dismissed
at once as delusions, but soft-shell crabs, terrapin, canvas-back ducks,
blue fish and the pompono of New Orleans are all wonderful delicacies,
particularly when one gets them at Delmonico’s.  Indeed, the two most
remarkable bits of scenery in the States are undoubtedly Delmonico’s and
the Yosemité Valley; and the former place has done more to promote a good
feeling between England and America than anything else has in this
century.

We hope the ‘Wanderer’ will go there soon and add a chapter to _Dinners
and Dishes_, and that his book will have in England the influence it
deserves.  There are twenty ways of cooking a potato and three hundred
and sixty-five ways of cooking an egg, yet the British cook, up to the
present moment, knows only three methods of sending up either one or the
other.

I have often heard people wonder what Shakespeare would say, could he see
Mr. Irving’s production of his _Much Ado About Nothing_, or Mr. Wilson
Barrett’s setting of his _Hamlet_.  Would he take pleasure in the glory
of the scenery and the marvel of the colour?  Would he be interested in
the Cathedral of Messina, and the battlements of Elsinore?  Or would he
be indifferent, and say the play, and the play only, is the thing?

Speculations like these are always pleasurable, and in the present case
happen to be profitable also.  For it is not difficult to see what
Shakespeare’s attitude would be; not difficult, that is to say, if one
reads Shakespeare himself, instead of reading merely what is written
about him.

Speaking, for instance, directly, as the manager of a London theatre,
through the lips of the chorus in _Henry V._, he complains of the
smallness of the stage on which he has to produce the pageant of a big
historical play, and of the want of scenery which obliges him to cut out
many of its most picturesque incidents, apologises for the scanty number
of supers who had to play the soldiers, and for the shabbiness of the
properties, and, finally, expresses his regret at being unable to bring
on real horses.

In the _Midsummer Night’s Dream_, again, he gives us a most amusing
picture of the straits to which theatrical managers of his day were
reduced by the want of proper scenery.  In fact, it is impossible to read
him without seeing that he is constantly protesting against the two
special limitations of the Elizabethan stage—the lack of suitable
scenery, and the fashion of men playing women’s parts, just as he
protests against other difficulties with which managers of theatres have
still to contend, such as actors who do not understand their words;
actors who miss their cues; actors who overact their parts; actors who
mouth; actors who gag; actors who play to the gallery, and amateur
actors.

And, indeed, a great dramatist, as he was, could not but have felt very
much hampered at being obliged continually to interrupt the progress of a
play in order to send on some one to explain to the audience that the
scene was to be changed to a particular place on the entrance of a
particular character, and after his exit to somewhere else; that the
stage was to represent the deck of a ship in a storm, or the interior of
a Greek temple, or the streets of a certain town, to all of which
inartistic devices Shakespeare is reduced, and for which he always amply
apologizes.  Besides this clumsy method, Shakespeare had two other
substitutes for scenery—the hanging out of a placard, and his
descriptions.  The first of these could hardly have satisfied his passion
for picturesqueness and his feeling for beauty, and certainly did not
satisfy the dramatic critic of his day.  But as regards the description,
to those of us who look on Shakespeare not merely as a playwright but as
a poet, and who enjoy reading him at home just as much as we enjoy seeing
him acted, it may be a matter of congratulation that he had not at his
command such skilled machinists as are in use now at the Princess’s and
at the Lyceum.  For had Cleopatra’s barge, for instance, been a structure
of canvas and Dutch metal, it would probably have been painted over or
broken up after the withdrawal of the piece, and, even had it survived to
our own day, would, I am afraid, have become extremely shabby by this
time.  Whereas now the beaten gold of its poop is still bright, and the
purple of its sails still beautiful; its silver oars are not tired of
keeping time to the music of the flutes they follow, nor the Nereid’s
flower-soft hands of touching its silken tackle; the mermaid still lies
at its helm, and still on its deck stand the boys with their coloured
fans.  Yet lovely as all Shakespeare’s descriptive passages are, a
description is in its essence undramatic.  Theatrical audiences are far
more impressed by what they look at than by what they listen to; and the
modern dramatist, in having the surroundings of his play visibly
presented to the audience when the curtain rises, enjoys an advantage for
which Shakespeare often expresses his desire.  It is true that
Shakespeare’s descriptions are not what descriptions are in modern
plays—accounts of what the audience can observe for themselves; they are
the imaginative method by which he creates in the mind of the spectators
the image of that which he desires them to see.  Still, the quality of
the drama is action.  It is always dangerous to pause for
picturesqueness.  And the introduction of self-explanatory scenery
enables the modern method to be far more direct, while the loveliness of
form and colour which it gives us, seems to me often to create an
artistic temperament in the audience, and to produce that joy in beauty
for beauty’s sake, without which the great masterpieces of art can never
be understood, to which, and to which only, are they ever revealed.

To talk of the passion of a play being hidden by the paint, and of
sentiment being killed by scenery, is mere emptiness and folly of words.
A noble play, nobly mounted, gives us double artistic pleasure.  The eye
as well as the ear is gratified, and the whole nature is made exquisitely
receptive of the influence of imaginative work.  And as regards a bad
play, have we not all seen large audiences lured by the loveliness of
scenic effect into listening to rhetoric posing as poetry, and to
vulgarity doing duty for realism?  Whether this be good or evil for the
public I will not here discuss, but it is evident that the playwright, at
any rate, never suffers.

Indeed, the artist who really has suffered through the modern mounting of
plays is not the dramatist at all, but the scene-painter proper.  He is
rapidly being displaced by the stage-carpenter.  Now and then, at Drury
Lane, I have seen beautiful old front cloths let down, as perfect as
pictures some of them, and pure painter’s work, and there are many which
we all remember at other theatres, in front of which some dialogue was
reduced to graceful dumb-show through the hammer and tin-tacks behind.
But as a rule the stage is overcrowded with enormous properties, which
are not merely far more expensive and cumbersome than scene-paintings,
but far less beautiful, and far less true.  Properties kill perspective.
A painted door is more like a real door than a real door is itself, for
the proper conditions of light and shade can be given to it; and the
excessive use of built-up structures always makes the stage too glaring,
for as they have to be lit from behind, as well as from the front, the
gas-jets become the absolute light of the scene instead of the means
merely by which we perceive the conditions of light and shadow which the
painter has desired to show us.

So, instead of bemoaning the position of the playwright, it were better
for the critics to exert whatever influence they may possess towards
restoring the scene-painter to his proper position as an artist, and not
allowing him to be built over by the property man, or hammered to death
by the carpenter.  I have never seen any reason myself why such artists
as Mr. Beverley, Mr. Walter Hann, and Mr. Telbin should not be entitled
to become Academicians.  They have certainly as good a claim as have many
of those R.A.’s whose total inability to paint we can see every May for a
shilling.

And lastly, let those critics who hold up for our admiration the
simplicity of the Elizabethan stage remember that they are lauding a
condition of things against which Shakespeare himself, in the spirit of a
true artist, always strongly protested.

I have been told that the ambition of every Dramatic Club is to act
_Henry IV_.  I am not surprised.  The spirit of comedy is as fervent in
this play as is the spirit of chivalry; it is an heroic pageant as well
as an heroic poem, and like most of Shakespeare’s historical dramas it
contains an extraordinary number of thoroughly good acting parts, each of
which is absolutely individual in character, and each of which
contributes to the evolution of the plot.

To Oxford belongs the honour of having been the first to present on the
stage this noble play, and the production which I saw last week was in
every way worthy of that lovely town, that mother of sweetness and of
light.  For, in spite of the roaring of the young lions at the Union, and
the screaming of the rabbits in the home of the vivisector, in spite of
Keble College, and the tramways, and the sporting prints, Oxford still
remains the most beautiful thing in England, and nowhere else are life
and art so exquisitely blended, so perfectly made one.  Indeed, in most
other towns art has often to present herself in the form of a reaction
against the sordid ugliness of ignoble lives, but at Oxford she comes to
us as an exquisite flower born of the beauty of life and expressive of
life’s joy.  She finds her home by the Isis as once she did by the
Ilissus; the Magdalen walks and the Magdalen cloisters are as dear to her
as were ever the silver olives of Colonus and the golden gateway of the
house of Pallas: she covers with fanlike tracery the vaulted entrance to
Christ Church Hall, and looks out from the windows of Merton; her feet
have stirred the Cumnor cowslips, and she gathers fritillaries in the
river-fields.  To her the clamour of the schools and the dullness of the
lecture-room are a weariness and a vexation of spirit; she seeks not to
define virtue, and cares little for the categories; she smiles on the
swift athlete whose plastic grace has pleased her, and rejoices in the
young Barbarians at their games; she watches the rowers from the reedy
bank and gives myrtle to her lovers, and laurels to her poets, and rue to
those who talk wisely in the street; she makes the earth lovely to all
who dream with Keats; she opens high heaven to all who soar with Shelley;
and turning away her head from pedant, proctor and Philistine, she has
welcomed to her shrine a band of youthful actors, knowing that they have
sought with much ardour for the stern secret of Melpomene, and caught
with much gladness the sweet laughter of Thalia.  And to me this ardour
and this gladness were the two most fascinating qualities of the Oxford
performance, as indeed they are qualities which are necessary to any fine
dramatic production.  For without quick and imaginative observation of
life the most beautiful play becomes dull in presentation, and what is
not conceived in delight by the actor can give no delight at all to
others.

I know that there are many who consider that Shakespeare is more for the
study than for the stage.  With this view I do not for a moment agree.
Shakespeare wrote the plays to be acted, and we have no right to alter
the form which he himself selected for the full expression of his work.
Indeed, many of the beauties of that work can be adequately conveyed to
us only through the actor’s art.  As I sat in the Town Hall of Oxford the
other night, the majesty of the mighty lines of the play seemed to me to
gain new music from the clear young voices that uttered them, and the
ideal grandeur of the heroism to be made more real to the spectators by
the chivalrous bearing, the noble gesture and the fine passion of its
exponents.  Even the dresses had their dramatic value.  Their
archæological accuracy gave us, immediately on the rise of the curtain, a
perfect picture of the time.  As the knights and nobles moved across the
stage in the flowing robes of peace and in the burnished steel of battle,
we needed no dreary chorus to tell us in what age or land the play’s
action was passing, for the fifteenth century in all the dignity and
grace of its apparel was living actually before us, and the delicate
harmonies of colour struck from the first a dominant note of beauty which
added to the intellectual realism of archæology the sensuous charm of
art.

I have rarely seen a production better stage-managed.  Indeed, I hope
that the University will take some official notice of this delightful
work of art.  Why should not degrees be granted for good acting?  Are
they not given to those who misunderstand Plato and who mistranslate
Aristotle?  And should the artist be passed over?  No.  To Prince Hal,
Hotspur and Falstaff, D.C.L.’s should be gracefully offered.  I feel sure
they would be gracefully accepted.  To the rest of the company the
crimson or the sheepskin hood might be assigned _honoris causâ_ to the
eternal confusion of the Philistine, and the rage of the industrious and
the dull.  Thus would Oxford confer honour on herself, and the artist be
placed in his proper position.  However, whether or not Convocation
recognizes the claims of culture, I hope that the Oxford Dramatic Society
will produce every summer for us some noble play like _Henry IV_.  For,
in plays of this kind, plays which deal with bygone times, there is
always this peculiar charm, that they combine in one exquisite
presentation the passions that are living with the picturesqueness that
is dead.  And when we have the modern spirit given to us in an antique
form, the very remoteness of that form can be made a method of increased
realism.  This was Shakespeare’s own attitude towards the ancient world,
this is the attitude we in this century should adopt towards his plays,
and with a feeling akin to this it seemed to me that these brilliant
young Oxonians were working.  If it was so, their aim is the right one.
For while we look to the dramatist to give romance to realism, we ask of
the actor to give realism to romance.

In spite of its somewhat alarming title this book may be highly
recommended to every one.  As for the authorities the author quotes, they
are almost numberless, and range from Socrates down to Artemus Ward.  He
tells us of the wicked bachelor who spoke of marriage as ‘a very harmless
amusement’ and advised a young friend of his to ‘marry early and marry
often’; of Dr. Johnson who proposed that marriage should be arranged by
the Lord Chancellor, without the parties concerned having any choice in
the matter; of the Sussex labourer who asked, ‘Why should I give a woman
half my victuals for cooking the other half?’ and of Lord Verulam who
thought that unmarried men did the best public work.  And, indeed,
marriage is the one subject on which all women agree and all men
disagree.  Our author, however, is clearly of the same opinion as the
Scotch lassie who, on her father warning her what a solemn thing it was
to get married, answered, ‘I ken that, father, but it’s a great deal
solemner to be single.’  He may be regarded as the champion of the
married life.  Indeed, he has a most interesting chapter on marriage-made
men, and though he dissents, and we think rightly, from the view recently
put forward by a lady or two on the Women’s Rights platform that Solomon
owed all his wisdom to the number of his wives, still he appeals to
Bismarck, John Stuart Mill, Mahommed, and Lord Beaconsfield, as instances
of men whose success can be traced to the influence of the women they
married.  Archbishop Whately once defined woman as ‘a creature that does
not reason and pokes the fire from the top,’ but since his day the higher
education of women has considerably altered their position.  Women have
always had an emotional sympathy with those they love; Girton and Newnham
have rendered intellectual sympathy also possible.  In our day it is best
for a man to be married, and men must give up the tyranny in married life
which was once so dear to them, and which, we are afraid, lingers still,
here and there.

‘Do you wish to be my wife, Mabel?’ said a little boy.  ‘Yes,’
incautiously answered Mabel.  ‘Then pull off my boots.’

On marriage vows our author has, too, very sensible views and very
amusing stories.  He tells of a nervous bridegroom who, confusing the
baptismal and marriage ceremonies, replied when asked if he consented to
take the bride for his wife: ‘I renounce them all’; of a Hampshire rustic
who, when giving the ring, said solemnly to the bride: ‘With my body I
thee wash up, and with all my hurdle goods I thee and thou’; of another
who when asked whether he would take his partner to be his wedded wife,
replied with shameful indecision: ‘Yes, I’m willin’; but I’d a sight
rather have her sister’; and of a Scotch lady who, on the occasion of her
daughter’s wedding, was asked by an old friend whether she might
congratulate her on the event, and answered: ‘Yes, yes, upon the whole it
is very satisfactory; it is true Jeannie hates her gudeman, but then
there’s always a something!’  Indeed, the good stories contained in this
book are quite endless and make it very pleasant reading, while the good
advice is on all points admirable.

Most young married people nowadays start in life with a dreadful
collection of ormolu inkstands covered with sham onyxes, or with a
perfect museum of salt-cellars.  We strongly recommend this book as one
of the best of wedding presents.  It is a complete handbook to an earthly
Paradise, and its author may be regarded as the Murray of matrimony and
the Baedeker of bliss.

Books, I fancy, may be conveniently divided into three classes:

1.  Books to read, such as Cicero’s _Letters_, Suetonius, Vasari’s _Lives
of the Painters_, the _Autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini_, Sir John
Mandeville, Marco Polo, St. Simon’s _Memoirs_, Mommsen, and (till we get
a better one) Grote’s _History of Greece_.

2.  Books to re-read, such as Plato and Keats: in the sphere of poetry,
the masters not the minstrels; in the sphere of philosophy, the seers not
the _savants_.

3.  Books not to read at all, such as Thomson’s _Seasons_, Rogers’s
_Italy_, Paley’s _Evidences_, all the Fathers except St. Augustine, all
John Stuart Mill except the essay on _Liberty_, all Voltaire’s plays
without any exception, Butler’s _Analogy_, Grant’s _Aristotle_, Hume’s
_England_, Lewes’s _History of Philosophy_, all argumentative books and
all books that try to prove anything.

The third class is by far the most important.  To tell people what to
read is, as a rule, either useless or harmful; for, the appreciation of
literature is a question of temperament not of teaching; to Parnassus
there is no primer and nothing that one can learn is ever worth learning.
But to tell people what not to read is a very different matter, and I
venture to recommend it as a mission to the University Extension Scheme.

Indeed, it is one that is eminently needed in this age of ours, an age
that reads so much, that it has no time to admire, and writes so much,
that it has no time to think.  Whoever will select out of the chaos of
our modern curricula ‘The Worst Hundred Books,’ and publish a list of
them, will confer on the rising generation a real and lasting benefit.

After expressing these views I suppose I should not offer any suggestions
at all with regard to ‘The Best Hundred Books,’ but I hope you will allow
me the pleasure of being inconsistent, as I am anxious to put in a claim
for a book that has been strangely omitted by most of the excellent
judges who have contributed to your columns.  I mean the _Greek
Anthology_.  The beautiful poems contained in this collection seem to me
to hold the same position with regard to Greek dramatic literature as do
the delicate little figurines of Tanagra to the Phidian marbles, and to
be quite as necessary for the complete understanding of the Greek spirit.

I am also amazed to find that Edgar Allan Poe has been passed over.
Surely this marvellous lord of rhythmic expression deserves a place?  If,
in order to make room for him, it be necessary to elbow out some one
else, I should elbow out Southey, and I think that Baudelaire might be
most advantageously substituted for Keble.

No doubt, both in the _Curse of Kehama_ and in the _Christian Year_ there
are poetic qualities of a certain kind, but absolute catholicity of taste
is not without its dangers.  It is only an auctioneer who should admire
all schools of art.

Of the many collections of letters that have appeared in this century
few, if any, can rival for fascination of style and variety of incident
the letters of George Sand which have recently been translated into
English by M. Ledos de Beaufort.  They extend over a space of more than
sixty years, from 1812 to 1876, in fact, and comprise the first letters
of Aurore Dupin, a child of eight years old, as well as the last letters
of George Sand, a woman of seventy-two.  The very early letters, those of
the child and of the young married woman, possess, of course, merely a
psychological interest; but from 1831, the date of Madame Dudevant’s
separation from her husband and her first entry into Paris life, the
interest becomes universal, and the literary and political history of
France is mirrored in every page.

For George Sand was an indefatigable correspondent; she longs in one of
her letters, it is true, for ‘a planet where reading and writing are
absolutely unknown,’ but still she had a real pleasure in letter-writing.
Her greatest delight was the communication of ideas, and she is always in
the heart of the battle.  She discusses pauperism with Louis Napoleon in
his prison at Ham, and liberty with Armand Barbes in his dungeon at
Vincennes; she writes to Lamennais on philosophy, to Mazzini on
socialism, to Lamartine on democracy, and to Ledru-Rollin on justice.
Her letters reveal to us not merely the life of a great novelist but the
soul of a great woman, of a woman who was one with all the noblest
movements of her day and whose sympathy with humanity was boundless
absolutely.  For the aristocracy of intellect she had always the deepest
veneration, but the democracy of suffering touched her more.  She
preached the regeneration of mankind, not with the noisy ardour of the
paid advocate, but with the enthusiasm of the true evangelist.  Of all
the artists of this century she was the most altruistic; she felt every
one’s misfortunes except her own.  Her faith never left her; to the end
of her life, as she tells us, she was able to believe without illusions.
But the people disappointed her a little.  She saw that they followed
persons not principles, and for ‘the great man theory’ George Sand had no
respect.  ‘Proper names are the enemies of principles’ is one of her
aphorisms.

So from 1850 her letters are more distinctly literary.  She discusses
modern realism with Flaubert, and play-writing with Dumas _fils_; and
protests with passionate vehemence against the doctrine of _L’art pour
l’art_.  ‘Art for the sake of itself is an idle sentence,’ she writes;
‘art for the sake of truth, for the sake of what is beautiful and good,
that is the creed I seek.’  And in a delightful letter to M. Charles
Poncy she repeats the same idea very charmingly.  ‘People say that birds
sing for the sake of singing, but I doubt it.  They sing their loves and
happiness, and in that they are in keeping with nature.  But man must do
something more, and poets only sing in order to move people and to make
them think.’  She wanted M. Poncy to be the poet of the people and, if
good advice were all that had been needed, he would certainly have been
the Burns of the workshop.  She drew out a delightful scheme for a volume
to be called _Songs of all Trades_ and saw the possibilities of making
handicrafts poetic.  Perhaps she valued good intentions in art a little
too much, and she hardly understood that art for art’s sake is not meant
to express the final cause of art but is merely a formula of creation;
but, as she herself had scaled Parnassus, we must not quarrel at her
bringing Proletarianism with her.  For George Sand must be ranked among
our poetic geniuses.  She regarded the novel as still within the domain
of poetry.  Her heroes are not dead photographs; they are great
possibilities.  Modern novels are dissections; hers are dreams.  ‘I make
popular types,’ she writes, ‘such as I do no longer see, but such as they
should and might be.’  For realism, in M. Zola’s acceptation of the word,
she had no admiration.  Art to her was a mirror that transfigured truths
but did not represent realities.  Hence she could not understand art
without personality.  ‘I am aware,’ she writes to Flaubert, ‘that you are
opposed to the exposition of personal doctrine in literature.  Are you
right?  Does not your opposition proceed rather from a want of conviction
than from a principle of æsthetics?  If we have any philosophy in our
brain it must needs break forth in our writings.  But you, as soon as you
handle literature, you seem anxious, I know not why, to be another man,
the one who must disappear, who annihilates himself and is no more.  What
a singular mania!  What a deficient taste!  The worth of our productions
depends entirely on our own.  Besides, if we withhold our own opinions
respecting the personages we create, we naturally leave the reader in
uncertainty as to the opinion he should himself form of them.  That
amounts to wishing not to be understood, and the result of this is that
the reader gets weary of us and leaves us.’

She herself, however, may be said to have suffered from too dominant a
personality, and this was the reason of the failure of most of her plays.

Of the drama in the sense of disinterested presentation she had no idea,
and what is the strength and life-blood of her novels is the weakness of
her dramatic works.  But in the main she was right.  Art without
personality is impossible.  And yet the aim of art is not to reveal
personality, but to please.  This she hardly recognized in her æsthetics,
though she realized it in her work.  On literary style she has some
excellent remarks.  She dislikes the extravagances of the romantic school
and sees the beauty of simplicity.  ‘Simplicity,’ she writes, ‘is the
most difficult thing to secure in this world: it is the last limit of
experience and the last effort of genius.’  She hated the slang and
_argot_ of Paris life, and loved the words used by the peasants in the
provinces.  ‘The provinces,’ she remarks, ‘preserve the tradition of the
original tongue and create but few new words.  I feel much respect for
the language of the peasantry; in my estimation it is the more correct.’

She thought Flaubert too much preoccupied with the sense of form, and
makes these excellent observations to him—perhaps her best piece of
literary criticism.  ‘You consider the form as the aim, whereas it is but
the effect.  Happy expressions are only the outcome of emotion and
emotion itself proceeds from a conviction.  We are only moved by that
which we ardently believe in.’  Literary schools she distrusted.
Individualism was to her the keystone of art as well as of life.  ‘Do not
belong to any school: do not imitate any model,’ is her advice.  Yet she
never encouraged eccentricity.  ‘Be correct,’ she writes to Eugène
Pelletan, ‘that is rarer than being eccentric, as the time goes.  It is
much more common to please by bad taste than to receive the cross of
honour.’

On the whole, her literary advice is sound and healthy.  She never
shrieks and she never sneers.  She is the incarnation of good sense.  And
the whole collection of her letters is a perfect treasure-house of
suggestions both on art and on politics.

A philosophic politician once remarked that the best possible form of
government is an absolute monarchy tempered by street ballads.

Without at all agreeing with this aphorism we still cannot but regret
that the new democracy does not use poetry as a means for the expression
of political opinion.  The Socialists, it is true, have been heard
singing the later poems of Mr. William Morris, but the street ballad is
really dead in England.  The fact is that most modern poetry is so
artificial in its form, so individual in its essence and so literary in
its style, that the people as a body are little moved by it, and when
they have grievances against the capitalist or the aristocrat they prefer
strikes to sonnets and rioting to rondels.

Possibly, Mr. William Toynbee’s pleasant little volume of translations
from Béranger may be the herald of a new school.  Béranger had all the
qualifications for a popular poet.  He wrote to be sung more than to be
read; he preferred the Pont Neuf to Parnassus; he was patriotic as well
as romantic, and humorous as well as humane.  Translations of poetry as a
rule are merely misrepresentations, but the muse of Béranger is so simple
and naïve that she can wear our English dress with ease and grace, and
Mr. Toynbee has kept much of the mirth and music of the original.  Here
and there, undoubtedly, the translation could be improved upon; ‘rapiers’
for instance is an abominable rhyme to ‘forefathers’; ‘the hated arms of
Albion’ in the same poem is a very feeble rendering of ‘le léopard de
l’Anglais,’ and such a verse as

reproduces very inadequately the charm of the original:

On the whole, however, Mr. Toynbee’s work is good; _Les Champs_, for
example, is very well translated, and so are the two delightful poems
_Rosette_ and _Ma République_; and there is a good deal of spirit in _Le
Marquis de Carabas_:

though ‘that blade immaculate’ has hardly got the sting of ‘un sabre
innocent’; and in the fourth verse of the same poem, ‘Marquise, you’ll
have the bed-chamber’ does not very clearly convey the sense of the line
‘La Marquise a le tabouret.’  Béranger is not nearly well enough known in
England, and though it is always better to read a poet in the original,
still translations have their value as echoes have their music.

The Countess Martinengo deserves well of all poets, peasants and
publishers.  Folk-lore is so often treated nowadays merely from the point
of view of the comparative mythologist, that it is really delightful to
come across a book that deals with the subject simply as literature.  For
the Folk-tale is the father of all fiction as the Folk-song is the mother
of all poetry; and in the games, the tales and the ballads of primitive
people it is easy to see the germs of such perfected forms of art as the
drama, the novel and the epic.  It is, of course, true that the highest
expression of life is to be found not in the popular songs, however
poetical, of any nation, but in the great masterpieces of self-conscious
Art; yet it is pleasant sometimes to leave the summit of Parnassus to
look at the wildflowers in the valley, and to turn from the lyre of
Apollo to listen to the reed of Pan.  We can still listen to it.  To this
day, the vineyard dressers of Calabria will mock the passer-by with
satirical verses as they used to do in the old pagan days, and the
peasants of the olive woods of Provence answer each other in amœbæan
strains.  The Sicilian shepherd has not yet thrown his pipe aside, and
the children of modern Greece sing the swallow-song through the villages
in spring-time, though Theognis is more than two thousand years dead.
Nor is this popular poetry merely the rhythmic expression of joy and
sorrow; it is in the highest degree imaginative; and taking its
inspiration directly from nature it abounds in realistic metaphor and in
picturesque and fantastic imagery.  It must, of course, be admitted that
there is a conventionality of nature as there is a conventionality of
art, and that certain forms of utterance are apt to become stereotyped by
too constant use; yet, on the whole, it is impossible not to recognize in
the Folk-songs that the Countess Martinengo has brought together one
strong dominant note of fervent and flawless sincerity.  Indeed, it is
only in the more terrible dramas of the Elizabethan age that we can find
any parallel to the Corsican _voceri_ with their shrill intensity of
passion, their awful frenzies of grief and hate.  And yet, ardent as the
feeling is, the form is nearly always beautiful.  Now and then, in the
poems of the extreme South one meets with a curious crudity of realism,
but, as a rule, the sense of beauty prevails.

Some of the Folk-poems in this book have all the lightness and loveliness
of lyrics, all of them have that sweet simplicity of pure song by which
mirth finds its own melody and mourning its own music, and even where
there are conceits of thought and expression they are conceits born of
fancy not of affectation.  Herrick himself might have envied that
wonderful love-song of Provence:

How charming also is this lullaby by which the Corsican mother sings her
babe to sleep!

Or this from Roumania:

We hardly know what poems are sung to English babies, but we hope they
are as beautiful as these two.  Blake might have written them.

The Countess Martinengo has certainly given us a most fascinating book.
In a volume of moderate dimensions, not too long to be tiresome nor too
brief to be disappointing, she has collected together the best examples
of modern Folk-songs, and with her as a guide the lazy reader lounging in
his armchair may wander from the melancholy pine-forests of the North to
Sicily’s orange-groves and the pomegranate gardens of Armenia, and listen
to the singing of those to whom poetry is a passion, not a profession,
and whose art, coming from inspiration and not from schools, if it has
the limitations, at least has also the loveliness of its origin, and is
one with blowing grasses and the flowers of the field.

The production of _The Cenci_ last week at the Grand Theatre, Islington,
may be said to have been an era in the literary history of this century,
and the Shelley Society deserves the highest praise and warmest thanks of
all for having given us an opportunity of seeing Shelley’s play under the
conditions he himself desired for it.  For _The Cenci_ was written
absolutely with a view to theatric presentation, and had Shelley’s own
wishes been carried out it would have been produced during his lifetime
at Covent Garden, with Edmund Kean and Miss O’Neill in the principal
parts.  In working out his conception, Shelley had studied very carefully
the æsthetics of dramatic art.  He saw that the essence of the drama is
disinterested presentation, and that the characters must not be merely
mouthpieces for splendid poetry but must be living subjects for terror
and for pity.  ‘I have endeavoured,’ he says, ‘as nearly as possible to
represent the characters as they probably were, and have sought to avoid
the error of making them actuated by my own conception of right or wrong,
false or true: thus under a thin veil converting names and actions of the
sixteenth century into cold impersonations of my own mind. . . .

‘I have avoided with great care the introduction of what is commonly
called mere poetry, and I imagine there will scarcely be found a detached
simile or a single isolated description, unless Beatrice’s description of
the chasm appointed for her father’s murder should be judged to be of
that nature.’

He recognized that a dramatist must be allowed far greater freedom of
expression than what is conceded to a poet.  ‘In a dramatic composition,’
to use his own words, ‘the imagery and the passion should interpenetrate
one another, the former being reserved simply for the full development
and illustration of the latter.  Imagination is as the immortal God which
should assume flesh for the redemption of mortal passion.  It is thus
that the most remote and the most familiar imagery may alike be fit for
dramatic purposes when employed in the illustration of strong feeling,
which raises what is low, and levels to the apprehension that which is
lofty, casting over all the shadow of its own greatness.  In other
respects I have written more carelessly, that is, without an
over-fastidious and learned choice of words.  In this respect I entirely
agree with those modern critics who assert that in order to move men to
true sympathy we must use the familiar language of men.’

He knew that if the dramatist is to teach at all it must be by example,
not by precept.

‘The highest moral purpose,’ he remarks, ‘aimed at in the highest species
of the drama, is the teaching the human heart, through its sympathies and
antipathies, the knowledge of itself; in proportion to the possession of
which knowledge every human being is wise, just, sincere, tolerant and
kind.  If dogmas can do more it is well: but a drama is no fit place for
the enforcement of them.’  He fully realizes that it is by a conflict
between our artistic sympathies and our moral judgment that the greatest
dramatic effects are produced.  ‘It is in the restless and anatomizing
casuistry with which men seek the justification of Beatrice, yet feel
that she has done what needs justification; it is in the superstitious
horror with which they contemplate alike her wrongs and their revenge,
that the dramatic character of what she did and suffered consists.’

In fact no one has more clearly understood than Shelley the mission of
the dramatist and the meaning of the drama.

Many years ago, in a number of _All the Year Round_, Charles Dickens
complained that Balzac was very little read in England, and although
since then the public has become more familiar with the great
masterpieces of French fiction, still it may be doubted whether the
_Comédie Humaine_ is at all appreciated or understood by the general run
of novel readers.  It is really the greatest monument that literature has
produced in our century, and M. Taine hardly exaggerates when he says
that, after Shakespeare, Balzac is our most important magazine of
documents on human nature.  Balzac’s aim, in fact, was to do for humanity
what Buffon had done for the animal creation.  As the naturalist studied
lions and tigers, so the novelist studied men and women.  Yet he was no
mere reporter.  Photography and _procès-verbal_ were not the essentials
of his method.  Observation gave him the facts of life, but his genius
converted facts into truths, and truths into truth.  He was, in a word, a
marvellous combination of the artistic temperament with the scientific
spirit.  The latter he bequeathed to his disciples; the former was
entirely his own.  The distinction between such a book as M. Zola’s
_L’Assommoir_ and such a book as Balzac’s _Illusions Perdues_ is the
distinction between unimaginative realism and imaginative reality.  ‘All
Balzac’s characters,’ said Baudelaire, ‘are gifted with the same ardour
of life that animated himself.  All his fictions are as deeply coloured
as dreams.  Every mind is a weapon loaded to the muzzle with will.  The
very scullions have genius.’  He was, of course, accused of being
immoral.  Few writers who deal directly with life escape that charge.
His answer to the accusation was characteristic and conclusive.  ‘Whoever
contributes his stone to the edifice of ideas,’ he wrote, ‘whoever
proclaims an abuse, whoever sets his mark upon an evil to be abolished,
always passes for immoral.  If you are true in your portraits, if, by
dint of daily and nightly toil, you succeed in writing the most difficult
language in the world, the word immoral is thrown in your face.’  The
morals of the personages of the _Comédie Humaine_ are simply the morals
of the world around us.  They are part of the artist’s subject-matter;
they are not part of his method.  If there be any need of censure it is
to life, not to literature, that it should be given.  Balzac, besides, is
essentially universal.  He sees life from every point of view.  He has no
preferences and no prejudices.  He does not try to prove anything.  He
feels that the spectacle of life contains its own secret.  ‘Il crée un
monde et se tait.’

And what a world it is!  What a panorama of passions!  What a pell-mell
of men and women!  It was said of Trollope that he increased the number
of our acquaintances without adding to our visiting list; but after the
_Comédie Humaine_ one begins to believe that the only real people are the
people who never existed.  Lucien de Rubempré, le Père Goriot, Ursule
Mirouët, Marguerite Claës, the Baron Hulot, Madame Marneffe, le Cousin
Pons, De Marsay—all bring with them a kind of contagious illusion of
life.  They have a fierce vitality about them: their existence is fervent
and fiery-coloured; we not merely feel for them but we see them—they
dominate our fancy and defy scepticism.  A steady course of Balzac
reduces our living friends to shadows, and our acquaintances to the
shadows of shades.  Who would care to go out to an evening party to meet
Tomkins, the friend of one’s boyhood, when one can sit at home with
Lucien de Rubempré?  It is pleasanter to have the entrée to Balzac’s
society than to receive cards from all the duchesses in Mayfair.

In spite of this, there are many people who have declared the _Comédie
Humaine_ to be indigestible.  Perhaps it is: but then what about
truffles?  Balzac’s publisher refused to be disturbed by any such
criticism as that.  ‘Indigestible, is it?’ he exclaimed with what, for a
publisher, was rare good sense.  ‘Well, I should hope so; who ever thinks
of a dinner that isn’t?’

As for Mr. Symonds’ estimate of Jonson’s genius, it is in many points
quite excellent.  He ranks him with the giants rather than with the gods,
with those who compel our admiration by their untiring energy and huge
strength of intellectual muscle, not with those ‘who share the divine
gifts of creative imagination and inevitable instinct.’  Here he is
right.  Pelion more than Parnassus was Jonson’s home.  His art has too
much effort about it, too much definite intention.  His style lacks the
charm of chance.  Mr. Symonds is right also in the stress he lays on the
extraordinary combination in Jonson’s work of the most concentrated
realism with encyclopædic erudition.  In Jonson’s comedies London slang
and learned scholarship go hand in hand.  Literature was as living a
thing to him as life itself.  He used his classical lore not merely to
give form to his verse, but to give flesh and blood to the persons of his
plays.  He could build up a breathing creature out of quotations.  He
made the poets of Greece and Rome terribly modern, and introduced them to
the oddest company.  His very culture is an element in his coarseness.
There are moments when one is tempted to liken him to a beast that has
fed off books.

We cannot, however, agree with Mr. Symonds when he says that Jonson
‘rarely touched more than the outside of character,’ that his men and
women are ‘the incarnations of abstract properties rather than living
human beings,’ that they are in fact mere ‘masqueraders and mechanical
puppets.’  Eloquence is a beautiful thing but rhetoric ruins many a
critic, and Mr. Symonds is essentially rhetorical.  When, for instance,
he tells us that ‘Jonson made masks,’ while ‘Dekker and Heywood created
souls,’ we feel that he is asking us to accept a crude judgment for the
sake of a smart antithesis.  It is, of course, true that we do not find
in Jonson the same growth of character that we find in Shakespeare, and
we may admit that most of the characters in Jonson’s plays are, so to
speak, ready-made.  But a ready-made character is not necessarily either
mechanical or wooden, two epithets Mr. Symonds uses constantly in his
criticism.

We cannot tell, and Shakespeare himself does not tell us, why Iago is
evil, why Regan and Goneril have hard hearts, or why Sir Andrew Aguecheek
is a fool.  It is sufficient that they are what they are, and that nature
gives warrant for their existence.  If a character in a play is lifelike,
if we recognize it as true to nature, we have no right to insist on the
author explaining its genesis to us.  We must accept it as it is: and in
the hands of a good dramatist mere presentation can take the place of
analysis, and indeed is often a more dramatic method, because a more
direct one.  And Jonson’s characters are true to nature.  They are in no
sense abstractions; they are types.  Captain Bobadil and Captain Tucca,
Sir John Daw and Sir Amorous La Foole, Volpone and Mosca, Subtle and Sir
Epicure Mammon, Mrs. Purecraft and the Rabbi Busy are all creatures of
flesh and blood, none the less lifelike because they are labelled.  In
this point Mr. Symonds seems to us unjust towards Jonson.

We think, also, that a special chapter might have been devoted to Jonson
as a literary critic.  The creative activity of the English Renaissance
is so great that its achievements in the sphere of criticism are often
overlooked by the student.  Then, for the first time, was language
treated as an art.  The laws of expression and composition were
investigated and formularized.  The importance of words was recognized.
Romanticism, Realism and Classicism fought their first battles.  The
dramatists are full of literary and art criticisms, and amused the public
with slashing articles on one another in the form of plays.

‘English Worthies.’  Edited by Andrew Lang.  _Ben Jonson_.  By John
Addington Symonds.  (Longmans, Green and Co.)

Mr. Symonds has at last finished his history of the Italian Renaissance.
The two volumes just published deal with the intellectual and moral
conditions in Italy during the seventy years of the sixteenth century
which followed the coronation of Charles the Fifth at Bologna, an era to
which Mr. Symonds gives the name of the Catholic Reaction, and they
contain a most interesting and valuable account of the position of Spain
in the Italian peninsula, the conduct of the Tridentine Council, the
specific organization of the Holy Office and the Company of Jesus, and
the state of society upon which those forces were brought to bear.  In
his previous volumes Mr. Symonds had regarded the past rather as a
picture to be painted than as a problem to be solved.  In these two last
volumes, however, he shows a clearer appreciation of the office of
history.  The art of the picturesque chronicler is completed by something
like the science of the true historian, the critical spirit begins to
manifest itself, and life is not treated as a mere spectacle, but the
laws of its evolution and progress are investigated also.  We admit that
the desire to represent life at all costs under dramatic conditions still
accompanies Mr. Symonds, and that he hardly realizes that what seems
romance to us was harsh reality to those who were engaged in it.  Like
most dramatists, also, he is more interested in the psychological
exceptions than in the general rule.  He has something of Shakespeare’s
sovereign contempt of the masses.  The people stir him very little, but
he is fascinated by great personalities.  Yet it is only fair to remember
that the age itself was one of exaggerated individualism, and that
literature had not yet become a mouthpiece for the utterances of
humanity.  Men appreciated the aristocracy of intellect, but with the
democracy of suffering they had no sympathy.  The cry from the
brickfields had still to be heard.  Mr. Symonds’ style, too, has much
improved.  Here and there, it is true, we come across traces of the old
manner, as in the apocalyptic vision of the seven devils that entered
Italy with the Spaniard, and the description of the Inquisition as a
Belial-Moloch, a ‘hideous idol whose face was blackened with soot from
burning human flesh.’  Such a sentence, also, as ‘over the Dead Sea of
social putrefaction floated the sickening oil of Jesuitical hypocrisy,’
reminds us that rhetoric has not yet lost its charms for Mr. Symonds.
Still, on the whole, the style shows far more reserve, balance and
sobriety, than can be found in the earlier volumes where violent
antithesis forms the predominant characteristic, and accuracy is often
sacrificed to an adjective.

Amongst the most interesting chapters of the book are those on the
Inquisition, on Sarpi, the great champion of the severance of Church from
State, and on Giordano Bruno.  Indeed, the story of Bruno’s life, from
his visit to London and Oxford, his sojourn in Paris and wanderings
through Germany, down to his betrayal at Venice and martyrdom at Rome, is
most powerfully told, and the estimate of the value of his philosophy and
the relation he holds to modern science, is at once just and
appreciative.  The account also of Ignatius Loyola and the rise of the
Society of Jesus is extremely interesting, though we cannot think that
Mr. Symonds is very happy in his comparison of the Jesuits to ‘fanatics
laying stones upon a railway’ or ‘dynamiters blowing up an emperor or a
corner of Westminster Hall.’  Such a judgment is harsh and crude in
expression and more suitable to the clamour of the Protestant Union than
to the dignity of the true historian.  Mr. Symonds, however, is rarely
deliberately unfair, and there is no doubt but that his work on the
Catholic Reaction is a most valuable contribution to modern history—so
valuable, indeed, that in the account he gives of the Inquisition in
Venice it would be well worth his while to bring the picturesque fiction
of the text into some harmony with the plain facts of the footnote.

On the poetry of the sixteenth century Mr. Symonds has, of course, a
great deal to say, and on such subjects he always writes with ease,
grace, and delicacy of perception.  We admit that we weary sometimes of
the continual application to literature of epithets appropriate to
plastic and pictorial art.  The conception of the unity of the arts is
certainly of great value, but in the present condition of criticism it
seems to us that it would be more useful to emphasize the fact that each
art has its separate method of expression.  The essay on Tasso, however,
is delightful reading, and the position the poet holds towards modern
music and modern sentiment is analysed with much subtlety.  The essay on
Marino also is full of interest.  We have often wondered whether those
who talk so glibly of Euphuism and Marinism in literature have ever read
either _Euphues_ or the _Adone_.  To the latter they can have no better
guide than Mr. Symonds, whose description of the poem is most
fascinating.  Marino, like many greater men, has suffered much from his
disciples, but he himself was a master of graceful fancy and of exquisite
felicity of phrase; not, of course, a great poet but certainly an artist
in poetry and one to whom language is indebted.  Even those conceits that
Mr. Symonds feels bound to censure have something charming about them.
The continual use of periphrases is undoubtedly a grave fault in style,
yet who but a pedant would really quarrel with such periphrases as
_sirena de’ boschi_ for the nightingale, or _il novello Edimione_ for
Galileo?

From the poets Mr. Symonds passes to the painters: not those great
artists of Florence and Venice of whom he has already written, but the
Eclectics of Bologna, the Naturalists of Naples and Rome.  This chapter
is too polemical to be pleasant.  The one on music is much better, and
Mr. Symonds gives us a most interesting description of the gradual steps
by which the Italian genius passed from poetry and painting to melody and
song, till the whole of Europe thrilled with the marvel and mystery of
this new language of the soul.  Some small details should perhaps be
noticed.  It is hardly accurate, for instance, to say that Monteverde’s
_Orfeo_ was the first form of the recitative-Opera, as Peri’s _Dafne_ and
_Euridice_ and Cavaliere’s _Rappresentazione_ preceded it by some years,
and it is somewhat exaggerated to say that ‘under the regime of the
Commonwealth the national growth of English music received a check from
which it never afterwards recovered,’ as it was with Cromwell’s auspices
that the first English Opera was produced, thirteen years before any
Opera was regularly established in Paris.  The fact that England did not
make such development in music as Italy and Germany did, must be ascribed
to other causes than ‘the prevalence of Puritan opinion.’

These, however, are minor points.  Mr. Symonds is to be warmly
congratulated on the completion of his history of the Renaissance in
Italy.  It is a most wonderful monument of literary labour, and its value
to the student of Humanism cannot be doubted.  We have often had occasion
to differ from Mr. Symonds on questions of detail, and we have more than
once felt it our duty to protest against the rhetoric and over-emphasis
of his style, but we fully recognize the importance of his work and the
impetus he has given to the study of one of the vital periods of the
world’s history.  Mr. Symonds’ learning has not made him a pedant; his
culture has widened not narrowed his sympathies, and though he can hardly
be called a great historian, yet he will always occupy a place in English
literature as one of the remarkable men of letters in the nineteenth
century.

Of all our modern poets, Mr. William Morris is the one best qualified by
nature and by art to translate for us the marvellous epic of the
wanderings of Odysseus.  For he is our only true story-singer since
Chaucer; if he is a Socialist, he is also a Saga-man; and there was a
time when he was never wearied of telling us strange legends of gods and
men, wonderful tales of chivalry and romance.  Master as he is of
decorative and descriptive verse, he has all the Greek’s joy in the
visible aspect of things, all the Greek’s sense of delicate and
delightful detail, all the Greek’s pleasure in beautiful textures and
exquisite materials and imaginative designs; nor can any one have a
keener sympathy with the Homeric admiration for the workers and the
craftsmen in the various arts, from the stainers in white ivory and the
embroiderers in purple and gold, to the weaver sitting by the loom and
the dyer dipping in the vat, the chaser of shield and helmet, the carver
of wood or stone.  And to all this is added the true temper of high
romance, the power to make the past as real to us as the present, the
subtle instinct to discern passion, the swift impulse to portray life.

It is no wonder the lovers of Greek literature have so eagerly looked
forward to Mr. Morris’s version of the Odyssean epic, and now that the
first volume has appeared, it is not extravagant to say that of all our
English translations this is the most perfect and the most satisfying.
In spite of Coleridge’s well-known views on the subject, we have always
held that Chapman’s _Odyssey_ is immeasurably inferior to his _Iliad_,
the mere difference of metre alone being sufficient to set the former in
a secondary place; Pope’s _Odyssey_, with its glittering rhetoric and
smart antithesis, has nothing of the grand manner of the original; Cowper
is dull, and Bryant dreadful, and Worsley too full of Spenserian
prettinesses; while excellent though Messrs. Butcher and Lang’s version
undoubtedly is in many respects, still, on the whole, it gives us merely
the facts of the _Odyssey_ without providing anything of its artistic
effect.  Avia’s translation even, though better than almost all its
predecessors in the same field, is not worthy of taking rank beside Mr.
Morris’s, for here we have a true work of art, a rendering not merely of
language into language, but of poetry into poetry, and though the new
spirit added in the transfusion may seem to many rather Norse than Greek,
and, perhaps at times, more boisterous than beautiful, there is yet a
vigour of life in every line, a splendid ardour through each canto, that
stirs the blood while one reads like the sound of a trumpet, and that,
producing a physical as well as a spiritual delight, exults the senses no
less than it exalts the soul.  It may be admitted at once that, here and
there, Mr. Morris has missed something of the marvellous dignity of the
Homeric verse, and that, in his desire for rushing and ringing metre, he
has occasionally sacrificed majesty to movement, and made stateliness
give place to speed; but it is really only in such blank verse as
Milton’s that this effect of calm and lofty music can be attained, and in
all other respects blank verse is the most inadequate medium for
reproducing the full flow and fervour of the Greek hexameter.  One merit,
at any rate, Mr. Morris’s version entirely and absolutely possesses.  It
is, in no sense of the word, literary; it seems to deal immediately with
life itself, and to take from the reality of things its own form and
colour; it is always direct and simple, and at its best has something of
the ‘large utterance of the early gods.’

As for individual passages of beauty, nothing could be better than the
wonderful description of the house of the Phœacian king, or the whole
telling of the lovely legend of Circe, or the manner in which the pageant
of the pale phantoms in Hades is brought before our eyes.  Perhaps the
huge epic humour of the escape from the Cyclops is hardly realized, but
there is always a linguistic difficulty about rendering this fascinating
story into English, and where we are given so much poetry we should not
complain about losing a pun; and the exquisite idyll of the meeting and
parting with the daughter of Alcinous is really delightfully told.  How
good, for instance, is this passage taken at random from the Sixth Book:

 
It may be objected by some that the line

is a rather fanciful version of

and it certainly seems probable that the allusion is to the dark colour
of the hero’s hair; still, the point is not one of much importance,
though it may be worth noting that a similar expression occurs in
Ogilby’s superbly illustrated translation of the _Odyssey_, published in
1665, where Charles II.’s Master of the Revels in Ireland gives the
passage thus:

No anthology, however, can show the true merit of Mr. Morris’s
translation, whose real merit does not depend on stray beauties, nor is
revealed by chance selections, but lies in the absolute rightness and
coherence of the whole, in its purity and justice of touch, its freedom
from affectation and commonplace, its harmony of form and matter.  It is
sufficient to say that this is a poet’s version of a poet, and for such
surely we should be thankful.  In these latter days of coarse and vulgar
literature, it is something to have made the great sea-epic of the South
native and natural to our northern isle, something to have shown that our
English speech may be a pipe through which Greek lips can blow, something
to have taught Nausicaa to speak the same language as Perdita.

Of the three great Russian novelists of our time Tourgenieff is by far
the finest artist.  He has that spirit of exquisite selection, that
delicate choice of detail, which is the essence of style; his work is
entirely free from any personal intention; and by taking existence at its
most fiery-coloured moments he can distil into a few pages of perfect
prose the moods and passions of many lives.

Count Tolstoi’s method is much larger, and his field of vision more
extended.  He reminds us sometimes of Paul Veronese, and, like that great
painter, can crowd, without over-crowding, the giant canvas on which he
works.  We may not at first gain from his works that artistic unity of
impression which is Tourgenieff’s chief charm, but once that we have
mastered the details the whole seems to have the grandeur and the
simplicity of an epic.  Dostoieffski differs widely from both his rivals.
He is not so fine an artist as Tourgenieff, for he deals more with the
facts than with the effects of life; nor has he Tolstoi’s largeness of
vision and epic dignity; but he has qualities that are distinctively and
absolutely his own, such as a fierce intensity of passion and
concentration of impulse, a power of dealing with the deepest mysteries
of psychology and the most hidden springs of life, and a realism that is
pitiless in its fidelity, and terrible because it is true.  Some time ago
we had occasion to draw attention to his marvellous novel _Crime and
Punishment_, where in the haunt of impurity and vice a harlot and an
assassin meet together to read the story of Dives and Lazarus, and the
outcast girl leads the sinner to make atonement for his sin; nor is the
book entitled _Injury and Insult_ at all inferior to that great
masterpiece.  Mean and ordinary though the surroundings of the story may
seem, the heroine Natasha is like one of the noble victims of Greek
tragedy; she is Antigone with the passion of Phædra, and it is impossible
to approach her without a feeling of awe.  Greek also is the gloom of
Nemesis that hangs over each character, only it is a Nemesis that does
not stand outside of life, but is part of our own nature and of the same
material as life itself.  Aleósha, the beautiful young lad whom Natasha
follows to her doom, is a second Tito Melema, and has all Tito’s charm
and grace and fascination.  Yet he is different.  He would never have
denied Baldassare in the Square at Florence, nor lied to Romola about
Tessa.  He has a magnificent, momentary sincerity, a boyish
unconsciousness of all that life signifies, an ardent enthusiasm for all
that life cannot give.  There is nothing calculating about him.  He never
thinks evil, he only does it.  From a psychological point of view he is
one of the most interesting characters of modern fiction, as from an
artistic he is one of the most attractive.  As we grow to know him he
stirs strange questions for us, and makes us feel that it is not the
wicked only who do wrong, nor the bad alone who work evil.

And by what a subtle objective method does Dostoieffski show us his
characters!  He never tickets them with a list nor labels them with a
description.  We grow to know them very gradually, as we know people whom
we meet in society, at first by little tricks of manner, personal
appearance, fancies in dress, and the like; and afterwards by their deeds
and words; and even then they constantly elude us, for though
Dostoieffski may lay bare for us the secrets of their nature, yet he
never explains his personages away; they are always surprising us by
something that they say or do, and keep to the end the eternal mystery of
life.

Irrespective of its value as a work of art, this novel possesses a deep
autobiographical interest also, as the character of Vania, the poor
student who loves Natasha through all her sin and shame, is
Dostoieffski’s study of himself.  Goethe once had to delay the completion
of one of his novels till experience had furnished him with new
situations, but almost before he had arrived at manhood Dostoieffski knew
life in its most real forms; poverty and suffering, pain and misery,
prison, exile, and love, were soon familiar to him, and by the lips of
Vania he has told his own story.  This note of personal feeling, this
harsh reality of actual experience, undoubtedly gives the book something
of its strange fervour and terrible passion, yet it has not made it
egotistic; we see things from every point of view, and we feel, not that
fiction has been trammelled by fact, but that fact itself has become
ideal and imaginative.  Pitiless, too, though Dostoieffski is in his
method as an artist, as a man he is full of human pity for all, for those
who do evil as well as for those who suffer it, for the selfish no less
than for those whose lives are wrecked for others and whose sacrifice is
in vain.  Since _Adam Bede_ and _Le Père Goriot_ no more powerful novel
has been written than _Insult and Injury_.

To convey ideas through the medium of images has always been the aim of
those who are artists as well as thinkers in literature, and it is to a
desire to give a sensuous environment to intellectual concepts that we
owe Mr. Pater’s last volume.  For these Imaginary or, as we should prefer
to call them, Imaginative Portraits of his, form a series of philosophic
studies in which the philosophy is tempered by personality, and the
thought shown under varying conditions of mood and manner, the very
permanence of each principle gaining something through the change and
colour of the life through which it finds expression.  The most
fascinating of all these pictures is undoubtedly that of Sebastian Van
Storck.  The account of Watteau is perhaps a little too fanciful, and the
description of him as one who was ‘always a seeker after something in the
world, that is there in no satisfying measure, or not at all,’ seems to
us more applicable to him who saw Mona Lisa sitting among the rocks than
the gay and debonair _peintre des fêtes galantes_.  But Sebastian, the
grave young Dutch philosopher, is charmingly drawn.  From the first
glimpse we get of him, skating over the water-meadows with his plume of
squirrel’s tail and his fur muff, in all the modest pleasantness of
boyhood, down to his strange death in the desolate house amid the sands
of the Helder, we seem to see him, to know him, almost to hear the low
music of his voice.  He is a dreamer, as the common phrase goes, and yet
he is poetical in this sense, that his theorems shape life for him,
directly.  Early in youth he is stirred by a fine saying of Spinoza, and
sets himself to realize the ideal of an intellectual disinterestedness,
separating himself more and more from the transient world of sensation,
accident and even affection, till what is finite and relative becomes of
no interest to him, and he feels that as nature is but a thought of his,
so he himself is but a passing thought of God.  This conception, of the
power of a mere metaphysical abstraction over the mind of one so
fortunately endowed for the reception of the sensible world, is
exceedingly delightful, and Mr. Pater has never written a more subtle
psychological study, the fact that Sebastian dies in an attempt to save
the life of a little child giving to the whole story a touch of poignant
pathos and sad irony.

_Denys l’Auxerrois_ is suggested by a figure found, or said to be found,
on some old tapestries in Auxerre, the figure of a ‘flaxen and flowery
creature, sometimes well-nigh naked among the vine-leaves, sometimes
muffled in skins against the cold, sometimes in the dress of a monk, but
always with a strong impress of real character and incident from the
veritable streets’ of the town itself.  From this strange design Mr.
Pater has fashioned a curious mediæval myth of the return of Dionysus
among men, a myth steeped in colour and passion and old romance, full of
wonder and full of worship, Denys himself being half animal and half god,
making the world mad with a new ecstasy of living, stirring the artists
simply by his visible presence, drawing the marvel of music from reed and
pipe, and slain at last in a stage-play by those who had loved him.  In
its rich affluence of imagery this story is like a picture by Mantegna,
and indeed Mantegna might have suggested the description of the pageant
in which Denys rides upon a gaily-painted chariot, in soft silken raiment
and, for head-dress, a strange elephant scalp with gilded tusks.

If _Denys l’Auxerrois_ symbolizes the passion of the senses and
_Sebastian Van Storck_ the philosophic passion, as they certainly seem to
do, though no mere formula or definition can adequately express the
freedom and variety of the life that they portray, the passion for the
imaginative world of art is the basis of the story of _Duke Carl of
Rosenmold_.  Duke Carl is not unlike the late King of Bavaria, in his
love of France, his admiration for the _Grand Monarque_ and his fantastic
desire to amaze and to bewilder, but the resemblance is possibly only a
chance one.  In fact Mr. Pater’s young hero is the precursor of the
_Aufklärung_ of the last century, the German precursor of Herder and
Lessing and Goethe himself, and finds the forms of art ready to his hand
without any national spirit to fill them or make them vital and
responsive.  He too dies, trampled to death by the soldiers of the
country he so much admired, on the night of his marriage with a peasant
girl, the very failure of his life lending him a certain melancholy grace
and dramatic interest.

On the whole, then, this is a singularly attractive book.  Mr. Pater is
an intellectual impressionist.  He does not weary us with any definite
doctrine or seek to suit life to any formal creed.  He is always looking
for exquisite moments and, when he has found them, he analyses them with
delicate and delightful art and then passes on, often to the opposite
pole of thought or feeling, knowing that every mood has its own quality
and charm and is justified by its mere existence.  He has taken the
sensationalism of Greek philosophy and made it a new method of art
criticism.  As for his style, it is curiously ascetic.  Now and then, we
come across phrases with a strange sensuousness of expression, as when he
tells us how Denys l’Auxerrois, on his return from a long journey, ‘ate
flesh for the first time, tearing the hot, red morsels with his delicate
fingers in a kind of wild greed,’ but such passages are rare.  Asceticism
is the keynote of Mr. Pater’s prose; at times it is almost too severe in
its self-control and makes us long for a little more freedom.  For
indeed, the danger of such prose as his is that it is apt to become
somewhat laborious.  Here and there, one is tempted to say of Mr. Pater
that he is ‘a seeker after something in language, that is there in no
satisfying measure, or not at all.’  The continual preoccupation with
phrase and epithet has its drawbacks as well as its virtues.  And yet,
when all is said, what wonderful prose it is, with its subtle
preferences, its fastidious purity, its rejection of what is common or
ordinary!  Mr. Pater has the true spirit of selection, the true art of
omission.  If he be not among the greatest prose writers of our
literature he is, at least, our greatest artist in prose; and though it
may be admitted that the best style is that which seems an unconscious
result rather than a conscious aim, still in these latter days when
violent rhetoric does duty for eloquence and vulgarity usurps the name of
nature, we should be grateful for a style that deliberately aims at
perfection of form, that seeks to produce its effect by artistic means
and sets before itself an ideal of grave and chastened beauty.

The Princess Christian’s translation of the _Memoirs of Wilhelmine_,
_Margravine of Baireuth_, is a most fascinating and delightful book.  The
Margravine and her brother, Frederick the Great, were, as the Princess
herself points out in an admirably written introduction, ‘among the first
of those questioning minds that strove after spiritual freedom’ in the
last century.  ‘They had studied,’ says the Princess, ‘the English
philosophers, Newton, Locke, and Shaftesbury, and were roused to
enthusiasm by the writings of Voltaire and Rousseau.  Their whole lives
bore the impress of the influence of French thought on the burning
questions of the day.  In the eighteenth century began that great
struggle of philosophy against tyranny and worn-out abuses which
culminated in the French Revolution.  The noblest minds were engaged in
the struggle, and, like most reformers, they pushed their conclusions to
extremes, and too often lost sight of the need of a due proportion in
things.  The Margravine’s influence on the intellectual development of
her country is untold.  She formed at Baireuth a centre of culture and
learning which had before been undreamt of in Germany.’

The historical value of these _Memoirs_ is, of course, well known.
Carlyle speaks of them as being ‘by far the best authority’ on the early
life of Frederick the Great.  But considered merely as the autobiography
of a clever and charming woman, they are no less interesting, and even
those who care nothing for eighteenth-century politics, and look upon
history itself as an unattractive form of fiction, cannot fail to be
fascinated by the Margravine’s wit, vivacity and humour, by her keen
powers of observation, and by her brilliant and assertive egotism.  Not
that her life was by any means a happy one.  Her father, to quote the
Princess Christian, ‘ruled his family with the same harsh despotism with
which he ruled his country, taking pleasure in making his power felt by
all in the most galling manner,’ and the Margravine and her brother ‘had
much to suffer, not only from his ungovernable temper, but also from the
real privations to which they were subjected.’  Indeed, the picture the
Margravine gives of the King is quite extraordinary.  ‘He despised all
learning,’ she writes, ‘and wished me to occupy myself with nothing but
needlework and household duties or details.  Had he found me writing or
reading, he would probably have whipped me.’  He ‘considered music a
capital offence, and maintained that every one should devote himself to
one object: men to the military service, and women to their household
duties.  Science and the arts he counted among the “seven deadly sins.”’
Sometimes he took to religion, ‘and then,’ says the Margravine, ‘we lived
like trappists, to the great grief of my brother and myself.  Every
afternoon the King preached a sermon, to which we had to listen as
attentively as if it proceeded from an Apostle.  My brother and I were
often seized with such an intense sense of the ridiculous that we burst
out laughing, upon which an apostolic curse was poured out on our heads,
which we had to accept with a show of humility and penitence.’  Economy
and soldiers were his only topics of conversation; his chief social
amusement was to make his guests intoxicated; and as for his temper, the
accounts the Margravine gives of it would be almost incredible if they
were not amply corroborated from other sources.  Suetonius has written of
the strange madness that comes on kings, but even in his melodramatic
chronicles there is hardly anything that rivals what the Margravine has
to tell us.  Here is one of her pictures of family life at a Royal Court
in the last century, and it is not by any means the worst scene she
describes:

Yet, as the Princess Christian remarks, ‘despite the almost cruel
treatment Wilhelmine received from her father, it is noticeable that
throughout her memoirs she speaks of him with the greatest affection.
She makes constant reference to his “good heart”’; and says that his
faults ‘were more those of temper than of nature.’  Nor could all the
misery and wretchedness of her home life dull the brightness of her
intellect.  What would have made others morbid, made her satirical.
Instead of weeping over her own personal tragedies, she laughs at the
general comedy of life.  Here, for instance, is her description of Peter
the Great and his wife, who arrived at Berlin in 1718:

Nor are the Margravine’s descriptions of her reception as a bride in the
principality of Baireuth less amusing.  Hof was the first town she came
to, and a deputation of nobles was waiting there to welcome her.  This is
her account of them:

As for Baireuth itself, and its petty Court, the picture she gives of it
is exceedingly curious.  Her father-in-law, the reigning Margrave, was a
narrow-minded mediocrity, whose conversation ‘resembled that of a sermon
read aloud for the purpose of sending the listener to sleep,’ and he had
only two topics, Telemachus, and Amelot de la Houssaye’s _Roman History_.
The Ministers, from Baron von Stein, who always said ‘yes’ to everything,
to Baron von Voit, who always said ‘no,’ were not by any means an
intellectual set of men.  ‘Their chief amusement,’ says the Margravine,
‘was drinking from morning till night,’ and horses and cattle were all
they talked about.  The palace itself was shabby, decayed and dirty.  ‘I
was like a lamb among wolves,’ cries the poor Margravine; ‘I was settled
in a strange country, at a Court which more resembled a peasant’s farm,
surrounded by coarse, bad, dangerous, and tiresome people.’

Yet her _esprit_ never deserted her.  She is always clever, witty, and
entertaining.  Her stories about the endless squabbles over precedence
are extremely amusing.  The society of her day cared very little for good
manners, knew, indeed, very little about them, but all questions of
etiquette were of vital importance, and the Margravine herself, though
she saw the shallowness of the whole system, was far too proud not to
assert her rights when circumstances demanded it, as the description she
gives of her visit to the Empress of Germany shows very clearly.  When
this meeting was first proposed, the Margravine declined positively to
entertain the idea.  ‘There was no precedent,’ she writes, ‘of a King’s
daughter and the Empress having met, and I did not know to what rights I
ought to lay claim.’  Finally, however, she is induced to consent, but
she lays down three conditions for her reception:


Many other extracts might be given from this delightful book, but from
the few that have been selected some idea can be formed of the vivacity
and picturesqueness of the Margravine’s style.  As for her character, it
is very well summed up by the Princess Christian, who, while admitting
that she often appears almost heartless and inconsiderate, yet claims
that, ‘taken as a whole, she stands out in marked prominence among the
most gifted women of the eighteenth century, not only by her mental
powers, but by her goodness of heart, her self-sacrificing devotion, and
true friendship.’  An interesting sequel to her _Memoirs_ would be her
correspondence with Voltaire, and it is to be hoped that we may shortly
see a translation of these letters from the same accomplished pen to
which we owe the present volume. {63}

One of the most powerful and pathetic novels that has recently appeared
is _A Village Tragedy_ by Margaret L. Woods.  To find any parallel to
this lurid little story, one must go to Dostoieffski or to Guy de
Maupassant.  Not that Mrs. Woods can be said to have taken either of
these two great masters of fiction as her model, but there is something
in her work that recalls their method; she has not a little of their
fierce intensity, their terrible concentration, their passionless yet
poignant objectivity; like them, she seems to allow life to suggest its
own mode of presentation; and, like them, she recognizes that a frank
acceptance of the facts of life is the true basis of all modern imitative
art.  The scene of Mrs. Woods’s story lies in one of the villages near
Oxford; the characters are very few in number, and the plot is extremely
simple.  It is a romance of modern Arcadia—a tale of the love of a
farm-labourer for a girl who, though slightly above him in social station
and education, is yet herself also a servant on a farm.  True Arcadians
they are, both of them, and their ignorance and isolation serve only to
intensify the tragedy that gives the story its title.  It is the fashion
nowadays to label literature, so, no doubt, Mrs. Woods’s novel will be
spoken of as ‘realistic.’  Its realism, however, is the realism of the
artist, not of the reporter; its tact of treatment, subtlety of
perception, and fine distinction of style, make it rather a poem than a
_procès-verbal_; and though it lays bare to us the mere misery of life,
it suggests something of life’s mystery also.  Very delicate, too, is the
handling of external Nature.  There are no formal guide-book descriptions
of scenery, nor anything of what Byron petulantly called ‘twaddling about
trees,’ but we seem to breathe the atmosphere of the country, to catch
the exquisite scent of the beanfields, so familiar to all who have ever
wandered through the Oxfordshire lanes in June; to hear the birds singing
in the thicket, and the sheep-bells tinkling from the hill.

Characterization, that enemy of literary form, is such an essential part
of the method of the modern writer of fiction, that Nature has almost
become to the novelist what light and shade are to the painter—the one
permanent element of style; and if the power of _A Village Tragedy_ be
due to its portrayal of human life, no small portion of its charm comes
from its Theocritean setting.

Mr. Morris’s second volume brings the great romantic epic of Greek
literature to its perfect conclusion, and although there can never be an
ultimate translation of either _Iliad_ or _Odyssey_, as each successive
age is sure to find pleasure in rendering the two poems in its own manner
and according to its own canons of taste, still it is not too much to say
that Mr. Morris’s version will always be a true classic amongst our
classical translations.  It is not, of course, flawless.  In our notice
of the first volume we ventured to say that Mr. Morris was sometimes far
more Norse than Greek, nor does the volume that now lies before us make
us alter that opinion.  The particular metre, also, selected by Mr.
Morris, although admirably adapted to express ‘the strong-winged music of
Homer,’ as far as its flow and freedom are concerned, misses something of
its dignity and calm.  Here, it must be admitted, we feel a distinct
loss, for there is in Homer not a little of Milton’s lofty manner, and if
swiftness be an essential of the Greek hexameter, stateliness is one of
its distinguishing qualities in Homer’s hands.  This defect, however, if
we must call it a defect, seems almost unavoidable, as for certain
metrical reasons a majestic movement in English verse is necessarily a
slow movement; and, after all that can be said is said, how really
admirable is this whole translation!  If we set aside its noble qualities
as a poem and look on it purely from the scholar’s point of view, how
straightforward it is, how honest and direct!  Its fidelity to the
original is far beyond that of any other verse-translation in our
literature, and yet it is not the fidelity of a pedant to his text but
rather the fine loyalty of poet to poet.

When Mr. Morris’s first volume appeared many of the critics complained
that his occasional use of archaic words and unusual expressions robbed
his version of the true Homeric simplicity.  This, however, is not a very
felicitous criticism, for while Homer is undoubtedly simple in his
clearness and largeness of vision, his wonderful power of direct
narration, his wholesome sanity, and the purity and precision of his
method, simple in language he undoubtedly is not.  What he was to his
contemporaries we have, of course, no means of judging, but we know that
the Athenian of the fifth century B.C. found him in many places difficult
to understand, and when the creative age was succeeded by the age of
criticism and Alexandria began to take the place of Athens as the centre
of culture for the Hellenistic world, Homeric dictionaries and glossaries
seem to have been constantly published.  Indeed, Athenæus tells us of a
wonderful Byzantine blue-stocking, a _précieuse_ from the Propontis, who
wrote a long hexameter poem, called _Mnemosyne_, full of ingenious
commentaries on difficulties in Homer, and in fact, it is evident that,
as far as the language is concerned, such a phrase as ‘Homeric
simplicity’ would have rather amazed an ancient Greek.  As for Mr.
Morris’s tendency to emphasize the etymological meaning of words, a point
commented on with somewhat flippant severity in a recent number of
_Macmillan_’_s Magazine_, here Mr. Morris seems to us to be in complete
accord, not merely with the spirit of Homer, but with the spirit of all
early poetry.  It is quite true that language is apt to degenerate into a
system of almost algebraic symbols, and the modern city-man who takes a
ticket for Blackfriars Bridge, naturally never thinks of the Dominican
monks who once had their monastery by Thames-side, and after whom the
spot is named.  But in earlier times it was not so.  Men were then keenly
conscious of the real meaning of words, and early poetry, especially, is
full of this feeling, and, indeed, may be said to owe to it no small
portion of its poetic power and charm.  These old words, then, and this
old use of words which we find in Mr. Morris’s _Odyssey_ can be amply
justified upon historical grounds, and as for their artistic effect, it
is quite excellent.  Pope tried to put Homer into the ordinary language
of his day, with what result we know only too well; but Mr. Morris, who
uses his archaisms with the tact of a true artist, and to whom indeed
they seem to come absolutely naturally, has succeeded in giving to his
version by their aid that touch, not of ‘quaintness,’ for Homer is never
quaint, but of old-world romance and old-world beauty, which we moderns
find so pleasurable, and to which the Greeks themselves were so keenly
sensitive.

As for individual passages of special merit, Mr. Morris’s translation is
no robe of rags sewn with purple patches for critics to sample.  Its real
value lies in the absolute rightness and coherence of the whole, in the
grand architecture of the swift, strong verse, and in the fact that the
standard is not merely high but everywhere sustained.  It is impossible,
however, to resist the temptation of quoting Mr. Morris’s rendering of
that famous passage in the twenty-third book of the epic, in which
Odysseus eludes the trap laid for him by Penelope, whose very faith in
the certainty of her husband’s return makes her sceptical of his identity
when he stands before her; an instance, by the way, of Homer’s wonderful
psychological knowledge of human nature, as it is always the dreamer
himself who is most surprised when his dream comes true.

These last twelve books of the _Odyssey_ have not the same marvel of
romance, adventure and colour that we find in the earlier part of the
epic.  There is nothing in them that we can compare to the exquisite
idyll of Nausicaa or to the Titanic humour of the episode in the Cyclops’
cave.  Penelope has not the glamour of Circe, and the song of the Sirens
may sound sweeter than the whizz of the arrows of Odysseus as he stands
on the threshold of his hall.  Yet, for sheer intensity of passionate
power, for concentration of intellectual interest and for masterly
dramatic construction, these latter books are quite unequalled.  Indeed,
they show very clearly how it was that, as Greek art developed, the epos
passed into the drama.  The whole scheme of the argument, the return of
the hero in disguise, his disclosure of himself to his son, his terrible
vengeance on his enemies and his final recognition by his wife, reminds
us of the plot of more than one Greek play, and shows us what the great
Athenian poet meant when he said that his own dramas were merely scraps
from Homer’s table.  In rendering this splendid poem into English verse,
Mr. Morris has done our literature a service that can hardly be
over-estimated, and it is pleasant to think that, even should the
classics be entirely excluded from our educational systems, the English
boy will still be able to know something of Homer’s delightful tales, to
catch an echo of his grand music and to wander with the wise Odysseus
round ‘the shores of old romance.’

Phyllis Browne’s Life of Mrs. Somerville forms part of a very interesting
little series, called ‘The World’s Workers’—a collection of short
biographies catholic enough to include personalities so widely different
as Turner and Richard Cobden, Handel and Sir Titus Salt, Robert
Stephenson and Florence Nightingale, and yet possessing a certain
definite aim.  As a mathematician and a scientist, the translator and
popularizer of _La Mécanique Céleste_, and the author of an important
book on physical geography, Mrs. Somerville is, of course, well known.
The scientific bodies of Europe covered her with honours; her bust stands
in the hall of the Royal Society, and one of the Women’s Colleges at
Oxford bears her name.  Yet, considered simply in the light of a wife and
a mother, she is no less admirable; and those who consider that stupidity
is the proper basis for the domestic virtues, and that intellectual women
must of necessity be helpless with their hands, cannot do better than
read Phyllis Browne’s pleasant little book, in which they will find that
the greatest woman-mathematician of any age was a clever needlewoman, a
good housekeeper, and a most skilful cook.  Indeed, Mrs. Somerville seems
to have been quite renowned for her cookery.  The discoverers of the
North-West Passage christened an island ‘Somerville,’ not as a tribute to
the distinguished mathematician, but as a recognition of the excellence
of some orange marmalade which the distinguished mathematician had
prepared with her own hands and presented to the ships before they left
England; and to the fact that she was able to make currant jelly at a
very critical moment she owed the affection of some of her husband’s
relatives, who up to that time had been rather prejudiced against her on
the ground that she was merely an unpractical Blue-stocking.

Nor did her scientific knowledge ever warp or dull the tenderness and
humanity of her nature.  For birds and animals she had always a great
love.  We hear of her as a little girl watching with eager eyes the
swallows as they built their nests in summer or prepared for their flight
in the autumn; and when snow was on the ground she used to open the
windows to let the robins hop in and pick crumbs on the breakfast-table.
On one occasion she went with her father on a tour in the Highlands, and
found on her return that a pet goldfinch, which had been left in the
charge of the servants, had been neglected by them and had died of
starvation.  She was almost heart-broken at the event, and in writing her
_Recollections_, seventy years after, she mentioned it and said that, as
she wrote, she felt deep pain.  Her chief pet in her old age was a
mountain sparrow, which used to perch on her arm and go to sleep there
while she was writing.  One day the sparrow fell into the water-jug and
was drowned, to the great grief of its mistress who could hardly be
consoled for its loss, though later on we hear of a beautiful paroquet
taking the place of _le moineau d’Uranie_, and becoming Mrs. Somerville’s
constant companion.  She was also very energetic, Phyllis Browne tells
us, in trying to get a law passed in the Italian Parliament for the
protection of animals, and said once, with reference to this subject, ‘We
English cannot boast of humanity so long as our sportsmen find pleasure
in shooting down tame pigeons as they fly terrified out of a cage’—a
remark with which I entirely agree.  Mr. Herbert’s Bill for the
protection of land birds gave her immense pleasure, though, to quote her
own words, she was ‘grieved to find that “the lark, which at heaven’s
gate sings,” is thought unworthy of man’s protection’; and she took a
great fancy to a gentleman who, on being told of the number of singing
birds that is eaten in Italy—nightingales, goldfinches, and
robins—exclaimed in horror, ‘What! robins! our household birds!  I would
as soon eat a child!’  Indeed, she believed to some extent in the
immortality of animals on the ground that, if animals have no future, it
would seem as if some were created for uncompensated misery—an idea which
does not seem to me to be either extravagant or fantastic, though it must
be admitted that the optimism on which it is based receives absolutely no
support from science.

On the whole, Phyllis Browne’s book is very pleasant reading.  Its only
fault is that it is far too short, and this is a fault so rare in modern
literature that it almost amounts to a distinction.  However, Phyllis
Browne has managed to crowd into the narrow limits at her disposal a
great many interesting anecdotes.  The picture she gives of Mrs.
Somerville working away at her translation of Laplace in the same room
with her children is very charming, and reminds one of what is told of
George Sand; there is an amusing account of Mrs. Somerville’s visit to
the widow of the young Pretender, the Countess of Albany, who, after
talking with her for some time, exclaimed, ‘So you don’t speak Italian.
You must have had a very bad education’!  And this story about the
Waverley Novels may possibly be new to some of my readers:

Phyllis Browne remarks that this incident shows ‘that persons who want to
keep a secret ought to be very careful when children are about’; but the
story seems to me to be far too charming to require any moral of the
kind.

Bound up in the same volume is a Life of Miss Mary Carpenter, also
written by Phyllis Browne.  Miss Carpenter does not seem to me to have
the charm and fascination of Mrs. Somerville.  There is always something
about her that is formal, limited, and precise.  When she was about two
years old she insisted on being called ‘Doctor Carpenter’ in the nursery;
at the age of twelve she is described by a friend as a sedate little
girl, who always spoke like a book; and before she entered on her
educational schemes she wrote down a solemn dedication of herself to the
service of humanity.  However, she was one of the practical, hardworking
saints of the nineteenth century, and it is no doubt quite right that the
saints should take themselves very seriously.  It is only fair also to
remember that her work of rescue and reformation was carried on under
great difficulties.  Here, for instance, is the picture Miss Cobbe gives
us of one of the Bristol night-schools:

Her own account is somewhat pleasanter, and shows that ‘the troop of
bisons in hob-nailed shoes’ was not always so barbarous.

A boy defined conscience as ‘a thing a gentleman hasn’t got, who, when a
boy finds his purse and gives it back to him, doesn’t give the boy
sixpence.’

Another boy was asked, after a Sunday evening lecture on ‘Thankfulness,’
what pleasure he enjoyed most in the course of a year.  He replied
candidly, ‘Cock-fightin’, ma’am; there’s a pit up by the “Black Boy” as
is worth anythink in Brissel.’

There is something a little pathetic in the attempt to civilize the rough
street-boy by means of the refining influence of ferns and fossils, and
it is difficult to help feeling that Miss Carpenter rather over-estimated
the value of elementary education.  The poor are not to be fed upon
facts.  Even Shakespeare and the Pyramids are not sufficient; nor is
there much use in giving them the results of culture, unless we also give
them those conditions under which culture can be realized.  In these
cold, crowded cities of the North, the proper basis for morals, using the
word in its wide Hellenic signification, is to be found in architecture,
not in books.

Still, it would be ungenerous not to recognize that Mary Carpenter gave
to the children of the poor not merely her learning, but her love.  In
early life, her biographer tells us, she had longed for the happiness of
being a wife and a mother; but later she became content that her
affection could be freely given to all who needed it, and the verse in
the prophecies, ‘I have given thee children whom thou hast not borne,’
seemed to her to indicate what was to be her true mission.  Indeed, she
rather inclined to Bacon’s opinion, that unmarried people do the best
public work.  ‘It is quite striking,’ she says in one of her letters, ‘to
observe how much the useful power and influence of woman has developed of
late years.  Unattached ladies, such as widows and unmarried women, have
quite ample work to do in the world for the good of others to absorb all
their powers.  Wives and mothers have a very noble work given them by
God, and want no more.’  The whole passage is extremely interesting, and
the phrase ‘unattached ladies’ is quite delightful, and reminds one of
Charles Lamb.

In society, says Mr. Mahaffy, every civilized man and woman ought to feel
it their duty to say something, even when there is hardly anything to be
said, and, in order to encourage this delightful art of brilliant
chatter, he has published a social guide without which no _débutante_ or
dandy should ever dream of going out to dine.  Not that Mr. Mahaffy’s
book can be said to be, in any sense of the word, popular.  In discussing
this important subject of conversation, he has not merely followed the
scientific method of Aristotle which is, perhaps, excusable, but he has
adopted the literary style of Aristotle for which no excuse is possible.
There is, also, hardly a single anecdote, hardly a single illustration,
and the reader is left to put the Professor’s abstract rules into
practice, without either the examples or the warnings of history to
encourage or to dissuade him in his reckless career.  Still, the book can
be warmly recommended to all who propose to substitute the vice of
verbosity for the stupidity of silence.  It fascinates in spite of its
form and pleases in spite of its pedantry, and is the nearest approach,
that we know of, in modern literature to meeting Aristotle at an
afternoon tea.

As regards physical conditions, the only one that is considered by Mr.
Mahaffy as being absolutely essential to a good conversationalist, is the
possession of a musical voice.  Some learned writers have been of opinion
that a slight stammer often gives peculiar zest to conversation, but Mr.
Mahaffy rejects this view and is extremely severe on every eccentricity
from a native brogue to an artificial catchword.  With his remarks on the
latter point, the meaningless repetition of phrases, we entirely agree.
Nothing can be more irritating than the scientific person who is always
saying ‘_Exactly so_,’ or the commonplace person who ends every sentence
with ‘_Don’t you know_?’ or the pseudo-artistic person who murmurs
‘_Charming_, _charming_,’ on the smallest-provocation.  It is, however,
with the mental and moral qualifications for conversation that Mr.
Mahaffy specially deals.  Knowledge he, naturally, regards as an absolute
essential, for, as he most justly observes, ‘an ignorant man is seldom
agreeable, except as a butt.’  Upon the other hand, strict accuracy
should be avoided.  ‘Even a consummate liar,’ says Mr. Mahaffy, is a
better ingredient in a company than ‘the scrupulously truthful man, who
weighs every statement, questions every fact, and corrects every
inaccuracy.’  The liar at any rate recognizes that recreation, not
instruction, is the aim of conversation, and is a far more civilized
being than the blockhead who loudly expresses his disbelief in a story
which is told simply for the amusement of the company.  Mr. Mahaffy,
however, makes an exception in favour of the eminent specialist and tells
us that intelligent questions addressed to an astronomer, or a pure
mathematician, will elicit many curious facts which will pleasantly
beguile the time.  Here, in the interest of Society, we feel bound to
enter a formal protest.  Nobody, even in the provinces, should ever be
allowed to ask an intelligent question about pure mathematics across a
dinner-table.  A question of this kind is quite as bad as inquiring
suddenly about the state of a man’s soul, a sort of _coup_ which, as Mr.
Mahaffy remarks elsewhere, ‘many pious people have actually thought a
decent introduction to a conversation.’

As for the moral qualifications of a good talker, Mr. Mahaffy, following
the example of his great master, warns us against any disproportionate
excess of virtue.  Modesty, for instance, may easily become a social
vice, and to be continually apologizing for one’s ignorance or stupidity
is a grave injury to conversation, for, ‘what we want to learn from each
member is his free opinion on the subject in hand, not his own estimate
of the value of that opinion.’  Simplicity, too, is not without its
dangers.  The _enfant terrible_, with his shameless love of truth, the
raw country-bred girl who always says what she means, and the plain,
blunt man who makes a point of speaking his mind on every possible
occasion, without ever considering whether he has a mind at all, are the
fatal examples of what simplicity leads to.  Shyness may be a form of
vanity, and reserve a development of pride, and as for sympathy, what can
be more detestable than the man, or woman, who insists on agreeing with
everybody, and so makes ‘a discussion, which implies differences in
opinion,’ absolutely impossible?  Even the unselfish listener is apt to
become a bore.  ‘These silent people,’ says Mr. Mahaffy, ‘not only take
all they can get in Society for nothing, but they take it without the
smallest gratitude, and have the audacity afterwards to censure those who
have laboured for their amusement.’  Tact, which is an exquisite sense of
the symmetry of things, is, according to Mr. Mahaffy, the highest and
best of all the moral conditions for conversation.  The man of tact, he
most wisely remarks, ‘will instinctively avoid jokes about Blue Beard’ in
the company of a woman who is a man’s third wife; he will never be guilty
of talking like a book, but will rather avoid too careful an attention to
grammar and the rounding of periods; he will cultivate the art of
graceful interruption, so as to prevent a subject being worn threadbare
by the aged or the inexperienced; and should he be desirous of telling a
story, he will look round and consider each member of the party, and if
there be a single stranger present will forgo the pleasure of anecdotage
rather than make the social mistake of hurting even one of the guests.
As for prepared or premeditated art, Mr. Mahaffy has a great contempt for
it and tells us of a certain college don (let us hope not at Oxford or
Cambridge) who always carried a jest-book in his pocket and had to refer
to it when he wished to make a repartee.  Great wits, too, are often very
cruel, and great humorists often very vulgar, so it will be better to try
and ‘make good conversation without any large help from these brilliant
but dangerous gifts.’

In a _tête-à-tête_ one should talk about persons, and in general Society
about things.  The state of the weather is always an excusable exordium,
but it is convenient to have a paradox or heresy on the subject always
ready so as to direct the conversation into other channels.  Really
domestic people are almost invariably bad talkers as their very virtues
in home life have dulled their interest in outer things.  The very best
mothers will insist on chattering of their babies and prattling about
infant education.  In fact, most women do not take sufficient interest in
politics, just as most men are deficient in general reading.  Still,
anybody can be made to talk, except the very obstinate, and even a
commercial traveller may be drawn out and become quite interesting.  As
for Society small talk, it is impossible, Mr. Mahaffy tells us, for any
sound theory of conversation to depreciate gossip, ‘which is perhaps the
main factor in agreeable talk throughout Society.’  The retailing of
small personal points about great people always gives pleasure, and if
one is not fortunate enough to be an Arctic traveller or an escaped
Nihilist, the best thing one can do is to relate some anecdote of ‘Prince
Bismarck, or King Victor Emmanuel, or Mr. Gladstone.’  In the case of
meeting a genius and a Duke at dinner, the good talker will try to raise
himself to the level of the former and to bring the latter down to his
own level.  To succeed among one’s social superiors one must have no
hesitation in contradicting them.  Indeed, one should make bold
criticisms and introduce a bright and free tone into a Society whose
grandeur and extreme respectability make it, Mr. Mahaffy remarks, as
pathetically as inaccurately, ‘perhaps somewhat dull.’  The best
conversationalists are those whose ancestors have been bilingual, like
the French and Irish, but the art of conversation is really within the
reach of almost every one, except those who are morbidly truthful, or
whose high moral worth requires to be sustained by a permanent gravity of
demeanour and a general dullness of mind.

These are the broad principles contained in Mr. Mahaffy’s clever little
book, and many of them will, no doubt, commend themselves to our readers.
The maxim, ‘If you find the company dull, blame yourself,’ seems to us
somewhat optimistic, and we have no sympathy at all with the professional
storyteller who is really a great bore at a dinner-table; but Mr. Mahaffy
is quite right in insisting that no bright social intercourse is possible
without equality, and it is no objection to his book to say that it will
not teach people how to talk cleverly.  It is not logic that makes men
reasonable, nor the science of ethics that makes men good, but it is
always useful to analyse, to formularize and to investigate.  The only
thing to be regretted in the volume is the arid and jejune character of
the style.  If Mr. Mahaffy would only write as he talks, his book would
be much pleasanter reading.

The want of a good series of popular handbooks on Irish art has long been
felt, the works of Sir William Wilde, Petrie and others being somewhat
too elaborate for the ordinary student; so we are glad to notice the
appearance, under the auspicesof the Committee of Council on Education,
of Miss Margaret Stokes’s useful little volume on the early Christian art
of her country.  There is, of course, nothing particularly original in
Miss Stokes’s book, nor can she be said to be a very attractive or
pleasing writer, but it is unfair to look for originality in primers, and
the charm of the illustrations fully atones for the somewhat heavy and
pedantic character of the style.

This early Christian art of Ireland is full of interest to the artist,
the archæologist and the historian.  In its rudest forms, such as the
little iron hand-bell, the plain stone chalice and the rough wooden
staff, it brings us back to the simplicity of the primitive Christian
Church, while to the period of its highest development we owe the great
masterpieces of Celtic metal-work.  The stone chalice is now replaced by
the chalice of silver and gold; the iron bell has its jewel-studded
shrine, and the rough staff its gorgeous casing; rich caskets and
splendid bindings preserve the holy books of the Saints and, instead of
the rudely carved symbol of the early missionaries, we have such
beautiful works of art as the processional cross of Cong Abbey.
Beautiful this cross certainly is with its delicate intricacy of
ornamentation, its grace of proportion and its marvel of mere
workmanship, nor is there any doubt about its history.  From the
inscriptions on it, which are corroborated by the annals of Innisfallen
and the book of Clonmacnoise, we learn that it was made for King Turlough
O’Connor by a native artist under the superintendence of Bishop O’Duffy,
its primary object being to enshrine a portion of the true cross that was
sent to the king in 1123.  Brought to Cong some years afterwards,
probably by the archbishop, who died there in 1150, it was concealed at
the time of the Reformation, but at the beginning of the present century
was still in the possession of the last abbot, and at his death it was
purchased by Professor MacCullagh and presented by him to the museum of
the Royal Irish Academy.  This wonderful work is alone well worth a visit
to Dublin, but not less lovely is the chalice of Ardagh, a two-handled
silver cup, absolutely classical in its perfect purity of form, and
decorated with gold and amber and crystal and with varieties of
_cloisonné_ and _champlevé_ enamel.  There is no mention of this cup, or
of the so-called Tara brooch, in ancient Irish history.  All that we know
of them is that they were found accidentally, the former by a boy who was
digging potatoes near the old Rath of Ardagh, the latter by a poor child
who picked it up near the seashore.  They both, however, belong probably
to the tenth century.

Of all these works, as well as of the bell shrines, book-covers,
sculptured crosses and illuminated designs in manuscripts, excellent
pictures are given in Miss Stokes’s handbook.  The extremely interesting
_Fiachal Phadrig_, or shrine of St. Patrick’s tooth, might have been
figured and noted as an interesting example of the survival of ornament,
and one of the old miniatures of the scribe or Evangelist writing would
have given an additional interest to the chapter on Irish MSS.  On the
whole, however, the book is wonderfully well illustrated, and the
ordinary art student will be able to get some useful suggestions from it.
Indeed, Miss Stokes, echoing the aspirations of many of the great Irish
archæologists, looks forward to the revival of a native Irish school in
architecture, sculpture, metal-work and painting.  Such an aspiration is,
of course, very laudable, but there is always a danger of these revivals
being merely artificial reproductions, and it may be questioned whether
the peculiar forms of Irish ornamentation could be made at all expressive
of the modern spirit.  A recent writer on house decoration has gravely
suggested that the British householder should take his meals in a Celtic
dining-room adorned with a dado of Ogham inscriptions, and such wicked
proposals may serve as a warning to all who fancy that the reproduction
of a form necessarily implies a revival of the spirit that gave the form
life and meaning, and who fail to recognize the difference between art
and anachronisms.  Miss Stokes’s proposal for an ark-shaped church in
which the mural painter is to repeat the arcades and ‘follow the
architectural compositions of the grand pages of the Eusebian canons in
the Book of Kells,’ has, of course, nothing grotesque about it, but it is
not probable that the artistic genius of the Irish people will, even when
‘the land has rest,’ find in such interesting imitations its healthiest
or best expression.  Still, there are certain elements of beauty in
ancient Irish art that the modern artist would do well to study.  The
value of the intricate illuminations in the Book of Kells, as far as
their adaptability to modern designs and modern material goes, has been
very much overrated, but in the ancient Irish torques, brooches, pins,
clasps and the like, the modern goldsmith will find a rich and,
comparatively speaking, an untouched field; and now that the Celtic
spirit has become the leaven of our politics, there is no reason why it
should not contribute something to our decorative art.  This result,
however, will not be obtained by a patriotic misuse of old designs, and
even the most enthusiastic Home Ruler must not be allowed to decorate his
dining-room with a dado of Oghams.

Madame Ristori’s _Etudes et Souvenirs_ is one of the most delightful
books on the stage that has appeared since Lady Martin’s charming volume
on the Shakespearian heroines.  It is often said that actors leave
nothing behind them but a barren name and a withered wreath; that they
subsist simply upon the applause of the moment; that they are ultimately
doomed to the oblivion of old play-bills; and that their art, in a word,
dies with them, and shares their own mortality.  ‘Chippendale, the
cabinet-maker,’ says the clever author of _Obiter Dicta_, ‘is more potent
than Garrick the actor.  The vivacity of the latter no longer charms
(save in Boswell); the chairs of the former still render rest impossible
in a hundred homes.’  This view, however, seems to me to be exaggerated.
It rests on the assumption that acting is simply a mimetic art, and takes
no account of its imaginative and intellectual basis.  It is quite true,
of course, that the personality of the player passes away, and with it
that pleasure-giving power by virtue of which the arts exist.  Yet the
artistic method of a great actor survives.  It lives on in tradition, and
becomes part of the science of a school.  It has all the intellectual
life of a principle.  In England, at the present moment, the influence of
Garrick on our actors is far stronger than that of Reynolds on our
painters of portraits, and if we turn to France it is easy to discern the
tradition of Talma, but where is the tradition of David?

Madame Ristori’s memoirs, then, have not merely the charm that always
attaches to the autobiography of a brilliant and beautiful woman, but
have also a definite and distinct artistic value.  Her analysis of the
character of Lady Macbeth, for instance, is full of psychological
interest, and shows us that the subtleties of Shakespearian criticism are
not necessarily confined to those who have views on weak endings and
rhyming tags, but may also be suggested by the art of acting itself.  The
author of _Obiter Dicta_ seeks to deny to actors all critical insight and
all literary appreciation.  The actor, he tells us, is art’s slave, not
her child, and lives entirely outside literature, ‘with its words for
ever on his lips, and none of its truths engraven on his heart.’  But
this seems to me to be a harsh and reckless generalization.  Indeed, so
far from agreeing with it, I would be inclined to say that the mere
artistic process of acting, the translation of literature back again into
life, and the presentation of thought under the conditions of action, is
in itself a critical method of a very high order; nor do I think that a
study of the careers of our great English actors will really sustain the
charge of want of literary appreciation.  It may be true that actors pass
too quickly away from the form, in order to get at the feeling that gives
the form beauty and colour, and that, where the literary critic studies
the language, the actor looks simply for the life; and yet, how well the
great actors have appreciated that marvellous music of words, which in
Shakespeare, at any rate, is so vital an element of poetic power, if,
indeed, it be not equally so in the case of all who have any claim to be
regarded as true poets.  ‘The sensual life of verse,’ says Keats, in a
dramatic criticism published in the _Champion_, ‘springs warm from the
lips of Kean, and to one learned in Shakespearian hieroglyphics, learned
in the spiritual portion of those lines to which Kean adds a sensual
grandeur, his tongue must seem to have robbed the Hybla bees and left
them honeyless.’  This particular feeling, of which Keats speaks, is
familiar to all who have heard Salvini, Sarah Bernhardt, Ristori, or any
of the great artists of our day, and it is a feeling that one cannot, I
think, gain merely by reading the passage to oneself.  For my own part, I
must confess that it was not until I heard Sarah Bernhardt in _Phèdre_
that I absolutely realized the sweetness of the music of Racine.  As for
Mr. Birrell’s statement that actors have the words of literature for ever
on their lips, but none of its truths engraved on their hearts, all that
one can say is that, if it be true, it is a defect which actors share
with the majority of literary critics.

The account Madame Ristori gives of her own struggles, voyages and
adventures, is very pleasant reading indeed.  The child of poor actors,
she made her first appearance when she was three months old, being
brought on in a hamper as a New Year’s gift to a selfish old gentleman
who would not forgive his daughter for having married for love.  As,
however, she began to cry long before the hamper was opened, the comedy
became a farce, to the immense amusement of the public.  She next
appeared in a mediæval melodrama, being then three years of age, and was
so terrified at the machinations of the villain that she ran away at the
most critical moment.  However, her stage-fright seems to have
disappeared, and we find her playing Silvio Pellico’s _Francesca da
Rimini_ at fifteen, and at eighteen making her _début_ as Marie Stuart.
At this time the naturalism of the French method was gradually displacing
the artificial elocution and academic poses of the Italian school of
acting.  Madame Ristori seems to have tried to combine simplicity with
style, and the passion of nature with the self-restraint of the artist.
‘J’ai voulu fondre les deux manières,’ she tells us, ‘car je sentais que
toutes choses étant susceptibles de progrès, l’art dramatique aussi était
appelé à subir des transformations.’  The natural development, however,
of the Italian drama was almost arrested by the ridiculous censorship of
plays then existing in each town under Austrian or Papal rule.  The
slightest allusion to the sentiment of nationality or the spirit of
freedom was prohibited.  Even the word _patria_ was regarded as
treasonable, and Madame Ristori tells us an amusing story of the
indignation of a censor who was asked to license a play, in which a dumb
man returns home after an absence of many years, and on his entrance upon
the stage makes gestures expressive of his joy in seeing his native land
once more.  ‘Gestures of this kind,’ said the censor, ‘are obviously of a
very revolutionary tendency, and cannot possibly be allowed.  The only
gestures that I could think of permitting would be gestures expressive of
a dumb man’s delight in scenery generally.’  The stage directions were
accordingly altered, and the word ‘landscape’ substituted for ‘native
land’!  Another censor was extremely severe on an unfortunate poet who
had used the expression ‘the beautiful Italian sky,’ and explained to him
that ‘the beautiful Lombardo-Venetian sky’ was the proper official
expression to use.  Poor Gregory in _Romeo and Juliet_ had to be
rechristened, because Gregory is a name dear to the Popes; and the

of the first witch in _Macbeth_ was ruthlessly struck out as containing
an obvious allusion to the steersman of St. Peter’s bark.  Finally, bored
and bothered by the political and theological Dogberrys of the day, with
their inane prejudices, their solemn stupidity, and their entire
ignorance of the conditions necessary for the growth of sane and healthy
art, Madame Ristori made up her mind to leave the stage.  She, however,
was extremely anxious to appear once before a Parisian audience, Paris
being at that time the centre of dramatic activity, and after some
consideration left Italy for France in the year 1855.  There she seems to
have been a great success, particularly in the part of Myrrha; classical
without being cold, artistic without being academic, she brought to the
interpretation of the character of Alfieri’s great heroine the
colour-element of passion, the form-element of style.  Jules Janin was
loud in his praises, the Emperor begged Ristori to join the troupe of the
Comédie Française, and Rachel, with the strange narrow jealousy of her
nature, trembled for her laurels.  Myrrha was followed by Marie Stuart,
and Marie Stuart by Medea.  In the latter part Madame Ristori excited the
greatest enthusiasm.  Ary Scheffer designed her costumes for her; and the
Niobe that stands in the Uffizi Gallery at Florence, suggested to Madame
Ristori her famous pose in the scene with the children.  She would not
consent, however, to remain in France, and we find her subsequently
playing in almost every country in the world from Egypt to Mexico, from
Denmark to Honolulu.  Her representations of classical plays seem to have
been always immensely admired.  When she played at Athens, the King
offered to arrange for a performance in the beautiful old theatre of
Dionysos, and during her tour in Portugal she produced _Medea_ before the
University of Coimbra.  Her description of the latter engagement is
extremely interesting.  On her arrival at the University, she was
received by the entire body of the undergraduates, who still wear a
costume almost mediæval in character.  Some of them came on the stage in
the course of the play as the handmaidens of Creusa, hiding their black
beards beneath heavy veils, and as soon as they had finished their parts
they took their places gravely among the audience, to Madame Ristori’s
horror, still in their Greek dress, but with their veils thrown back and
smoking long cigars.  ‘Ce n’est pas la première fois,’ she says, ‘que
j’ai dû empêcher, par un effort de volonté, la tragédie de se terminer en
farce.’  Very interesting, also, is her account of the production of
Montanelli’s _Camma_, and she tells an amusing story of the arrest of the
author by the French police on the charge of murder, in consequence of a
telegram she sent to him in which the words ‘body of the victim’
occurred.  Indeed, the whole book is full of cleverly written stories,
and admirable criticisms on dramatic art.  I have quoted from the French
version, which happens to be the one that lies before me, but whether in
French or Italian the book is one of the most fascinating autobiographies
that has appeared for some time, even in an age like ours when literary
egotism has been brought to such an exquisite pitch of perfection.

England has given to the world one great poetess, Elizabeth Barrett
Browning.  By her side Mr. Swinburne would place Miss Christina Rossetti,
whose New Year hymn he describes as so much the noblest of sacred poems
in our language, that there is none which comes near it enough to stand
second.  ‘It is a hymn,’ he tells us, ‘touched as with the fire, and
bathed as in the light of sunbeams, tuned as to chords and cadences of
refluent sea-music beyond reach of harp and organ, large echoes of the
serene and sonorous tides of heaven.’  Much as I admire Miss Rossetti’s
work, her subtle choice of words, her rich imagery, her artistic naïveté,
wherein curious notes of strangeness and simplicity are fantastically
blended together, I cannot but think that Mr. Swinburne has, with noble
and natural loyalty, placed her on too lofty a pedestal.  To me, she is
simply a very delightful artist in poetry.  This is indeed something so
rare that when we meet it we cannot fail to love it, but it is not
everything.  Beyond it and above it are higher and more sunlit heights of
song, a larger vision, and an ampler air, a music at once more passionate
and more profound, a creative energy that is born of the spirit, a winged
rapture that is born of the soul, a force and fervour of mere utterance
that has all the wonder of the prophet, and not a little of the
consecration of the priest.

Mrs. Browning is unapproachable by any woman who has ever touched lyre or
blown through reed since the days of the great Æolian poetess.  But
Sappho, who to the antique world was a pillar of flame, is to us but a
pillar of shadow.  Of her poems, burnt with other most precious work by
Byzantine Emperor and by Roman Pope, only a few fragments remain.
Possibly they lie mouldering in the scented darkness of an Egyptian tomb,
clasped in the withered hand of some long-dead lover.  Some Greek monk at
Athos may even now be poring over an ancient manuscript, whose crabbed
characters conceal lyric or ode by her whom the Greeks spoke of as ‘the
Poetess’ just as they termed Homer ‘the Poet,’ who was to them the tenth
Muse, the flower of the Graces, the child of Erôs, and the pride of
Hellas—Sappho, with the sweet voice, the bright, beautiful eyes, the dark
hyacinth coloured hair.  But, practically, the work of the marvellous
singer of Lesbos is entirely lost to us.

We have a few rose-leaves out of her garden, that is all.  Literature
nowadays survives marble and bronze, but in the old days, in spite of the
Roman poet’s noble boast, it was not so.  The fragile clay vases of the
Greeks still keep for us pictures of Sappho, delicately painted in black
and red and white; but of her song we have only the echo of an echo.

Of all the women of history, Mrs. Browning is the only one that we could
name in any possible or remote conjunction with Sappho.

Sappho was undoubtedly a far more flawless and perfect artist.  She
stirred the whole antique world more than Mrs. Browning ever stirred our
modern age.  Never had Love such a singer.  Even in the few lines that
remain to us the passion seems to scorch and burn.  But, as unjust Time,
who has crowned her with the barren laurels of fame, has twined with them
the dull poppies of oblivion, let us turn from the mere memory of a
poetess to one whose song still remains to us as an imperishable glory to
our literature; to her who heard the cry of the children from dark mine
and crowded factory, and made England weep over its little ones; who, in
the feigned sonnets from the Portuguese, sang of the spiritual mystery of
Love, and of the intellectual gifts that Love brings to the soul; who had
faith in all that is worthy, and enthusiasm for all that is great, and
pity for all that suffers; who wrote the _Vision of Poets_ and _Casa
Guidi Windows_ and _Aurora Leigh_.

As one, to whom I owe my love of poetry no less than my love of country,
said of her:

She lives indeed, and not alone in the heart of Shakespeare’s England,
but in the heart of Dante’s Italy also.  To Greek literature she owed her
scholarly culture, but modern Italy created her human passion for
Liberty.  When she crossed the Alps she became filled with a new ardour,
and from that fine, eloquent mouth, that we can still see in her
portraits, broke forth such a noble and majestic outburst of lyrical song
as had not been heard from woman’s lips for more than two thousand years.
It is pleasant to think that an English poetess was to a certain extent a
real factor in bringing about that unity of Italy that was Dante’s dream,
and if Florence drove her great singer into exile, she at least welcomed
within her walls the later singer that England had sent to her.

If one were asked the chief qualities of Mrs. Browning’s work, one would
say, as Mr. Swinburne said of Byron’s, its sincerity and its strength.
Faults it, of course, possesses.  ‘She would rhyme moon to table,’ used
to be said of her in jest; and certainly no more monstrous rhymes are to
be found in all literature than some of those we come across in Mrs.
Browning’s poems.  But her ruggedness was never the result of
carelessness.  It was deliberate, as her letters to Mr. Horne show very
clearly.  She refused to sandpaper her muse.  She disliked facile
smoothness and artificial polish.  In her very rejection of art she was
an artist.  She intended to produce a certain effect by certain means,
and she succeeded; and her indifference to complete assonance in rhyme
often gives a splendid richness to her verse, and brings into it a
pleasurable element of surprise.

In philosophy she was a Platonist, in politics an Opportunist.  She
attached herself to no particular party.  She loved the people when they
were king-like, and kings when they showed themselves to be men.  Of the
real value and motive of poetry she had a most exalted idea.  ‘Poetry,’
she says, in the preface of one of her volumes, ‘has been as serious a
thing to me as life itself; and life has been a very serious thing.
There has been no playing at skittles for me in either.  I never mistook
pleasure for the final cause of poetry, nor leisure for the hour of the
poet.  I have done my work so far, not as mere hand and head work apart
from the personal being, but as the completest expression of that being
to which I could attain.’

It certainly is her completest expression, and through it she realizes
her fullest perfection.  ‘The poet,’ she says elsewhere, ‘is at once
richer and poorer than he used to be; he wears better broadcloth, but
speaks no more oracles.’  These words give us the keynote to her view of
the poet’s mission.  He was to utter Divine oracles, to be at once
inspired prophet and holy priest; and as such we may, I think, without
exaggeration, conceive her.  She was a Sibyl delivering a message to the
world, sometimes through stammering lips, and once at least with blinded
eyes, yet always with the true fire and fervour of lofty and unshaken
faith, always with the great raptures of a spiritual nature, the high
ardours of an impassioned soul.  As we read her best poems we feel that,
though Apollo’s shrine be empty and the bronze tripod overthrown, and the
vale of Delphi desolate, still the Pythia is not dead.  In our own age
she has sung for us, and this land gave her new birth.  Indeed, Mrs.
Browning is the wisest of the Sibyls, wiser even than that mighty figure
whom Michael Angelo has painted on the roof of the Sistine Chapel at
Rome, poring over the scroll of mystery, and trying to decipher the
secrets of Fate; for she realized that, while knowledge is power,
suffering is part of knowledge.

To her influence, almost as much as to the higher education of women, I
would be inclined to attribute the really remarkable awakening of woman’s
song that characterizes the latter half of our century in England.  No
country has ever had so many poetesses at once.  Indeed, when one
remembers that the Greeks had only nine muses, one is sometimes apt to
fancy that we have too many.  And yet the work done by women in the
sphere of poetry is really of a very high standard of excellence.  In
England we have always been prone to underrate the value of tradition in
literature.  In our eagerness to find a new voice and a fresh mode of
music, we have forgotten how beautiful Echo may be.  We look first for
individuality and personality, and these are, indeed, the chief
characteristics of the masterpieces of our literature, either in prose or
verse; but deliberate culture and a study of the best models, if united
to an artistic temperament and a nature susceptible of exquisite
impressions, may produce much that is admirable, much that is worthy of
praise.  It would be quite impossible to give a complete catalogue of all
the women who since Mrs. Browning’s day have tried lute and lyre.  Mrs.
Pfeiffer, Mrs. Hamilton King, Mrs. Augusta Webster, Graham Tomson, Miss
Mary Robinson, Jean Ingelow, Miss May Kendall, Miss Nesbit, Miss May
Probyn, Mrs. Craik, Mrs. Meynell, Miss Chapman, and many others have done
really good work in poetry, either in the grave Dorian mode of thoughtful
and intellectual verse, or in the light and graceful forms of old French
song, or in the romantic manner of antique ballad, or in that ‘moment’s
monument,’ as Rossetti called it, the intense and concentrated sonnet.
Occasionally one is tempted to wish that the quick, artistic faculty that
women undoubtedly possess developed itself somewhat more in prose and
somewhat less in verse.  Poetry is for our highest moods, when we wish to
be with the gods, and in our poetry nothing but the very best should
satisfy us; but prose is for our daily bread, and the lack of good prose
is one of the chief blots on our culture.  French prose, even in the
hands of the most ordinary writers, is always readable, but English prose
is detestable.  We have a few, a very few, masters, such as they are.  We
have Carlyle, who should not be imitated; and Mr. Pater, who, through the
subtle perfection of his form, is inimitable absolutely; and Mr. Froude,
who is useful; and Matthew Arnold, who is a model; and Mr. George
Meredith, who is a warning; and Mr. Lang, who is the divine amateur; and
Mr. Stevenson, who is the humane artist; and Mr. Ruskin, whose rhythm and
colour and fine rhetoric and marvellous music of words are entirely
unattainable.  But the general prose that one reads in magazines and in
newspapers is terribly dull and cumbrous, heavy in movement and uncouth
or exaggerated in expression.  Possibly some day our women of letters
will apply themselves more definitely to prose.

Their light touch, and exquisite ear, and delicate sense of balance and
proportion would be of no small service to us.  I can fancy women
bringing a new manner into our literature.

However, we have to deal here with women as poetesses, and it is
interesting to note that, though Mrs. Browning’s influence undoubtedly
contributed very largely to the development of this new song-movement, if
I may so term it, still there seems to have been never a time during the
last three hundred years when the women of this kingdom did not
cultivate, if not the art, at least the habit, of writing poetry.

Who the first English poetess was I cannot say.  I believe it was the
Abbess Juliana Berners, who lived in the fifteenth century; but I have no
doubt that Mr. Freeman would be able at a moment’s notice to produce some
wonderful Saxon or Norman poetess, whose works cannot be read without a
glossary, and even with its aid are completely unintelligible.  For my
own part, I am content with the Abbess Juliana, who wrote
enthusiastically about hawking; and after her I would mention Anne Askew,
who in prison and on the eve of her fiery martyrdom wrote a ballad that
has, at any rate, a pathetic and historical interest.  Queen Elizabeth’s
‘most sweet and sententious ditty’ on Mary Stuart is highly praised by
Puttenham, a contemporary critic, as an example of ‘Exargasia, or the
Gorgeous in Literature,’ which somehow seems a very suitable epithet for
such a great Queen’s poems.  The term she applies to the unfortunate
Queen of Scots, ‘the daughter of debate,’ has, of course, long since
passed into literature.  The Countess of Pembroke, Sir Philip Sidney’s
sister, was much admired as a poetess in her day.

In 1613 the ‘learned, virtuous, and truly noble ladie,’ Elizabeth Carew,
published a _Tragedie of Marian_, _the Faire Queene of Jewry_, and a few
years later the ‘noble ladie Diana Primrose’ wrote _A Chain of Pearl_,
which is a panegyric on the ‘peerless graces’ of Gloriana.  Mary Morpeth,
the friend and admirer of Drummond of Hawthornden; Lady Mary Wroth, to
whom Ben Jonson dedicated _The Alchemist_; and the Princess Elizabeth,
the sister of Charles I., should also be mentioned.

After the Restoration women applied themselves with still greater ardour
to the study of literature and the practice of poetry.  Margaret, Duchess
of Newcastle, was a true woman of letters, and some of her verses are
extremely pretty and graceful.  Mrs. Aphra Behn was the first
Englishwoman who adopted literature as a regular profession.  Mrs.
Katharine Philips, according to Mr. Gosse, invented sentimentality.  As
she was praised by Dryden, and mourned by Cowley, let us hope she may be
forgiven.  Keats came across her poems at Oxford when he was writing
_Endymion_, and found in one of them ‘a most delicate fancy of the
Fletcher kind’; but I fear nobody reads the Matchless Orinda now.  Of
Lady Winchelsea’s _Nocturnal Reverie_ Wordsworth said that, with the
exception of Pope’s _Windsor Forest_, it was the only poem of the period
intervening between _Paradise Lost_ and Thomson’s _Seasons_ that
contained a single new image of external nature.  Lady Rachel Russell,
who may be said to have inaugurated the letter-writing literature of
England; Eliza Haywood, who is immortalized by the badness of her work,
and has a niche in _The Dunciad_; and the Marchioness of Wharton, whose
poems Waller said he admired, are very remarkable types, the finest of
them being, of course, the first named, who was a woman of heroic mould
and of a most noble dignity of nature.

Indeed, though the English poetesses up to the time of Mrs. Browning
cannot be said to have produced any work of absolute genius, they are
certainly interesting figures, fascinating subjects for study.  Amongst
them we find Lady Mary Wortley Montague, who had all the caprice of
Cleopatra, and whose letters are delightful reading; Mrs. Centlivre, who
wrote one brilliant comedy; Lady Anne Barnard, whose _Auld Robin Gray_
was described by Sir Walter Scott as ‘worth all the dialogues Corydon and
Phillis have together spoken from the days of Theocritus downwards,’ and
is certainly a very beautiful and touching poem; Esther Vanhomrigh and
Hester Johnson, the Vanessa and the Stella of Dean Swift’s life; Mrs.
Thrale, the friend of the great lexicographer; the worthy Mrs. Barbauld;
the excellent Miss Hannah More; the industrious Joanna Baillie; the
admirable Mrs. Chapone, whose _Ode to Solitude_ always fills me with the
wildest passion for society, and who will at least be remembered as the
patroness of the establishment at which Becky Sharp was educated; Miss
Anna Seward, who was called ‘The Swan of Lichfield’; poor L. E. L. whom
Disraeli described in one of his clever letters to his sister as ‘the
personification of Brompton—pink satin dress, white satin shoes, red
cheeks, snub nose, and her hair _à la_ Sappho’; Mrs. Ratcliffe, who
introduced the romantic novel, and has consequently much to answer for;
the beautiful Duchess of Devonshire, of whom Gibbon said that she was
‘made for something better than a Duchess’; the two wonderful sisters,
Lady Dufferin and Mrs. Norton; Mrs. Tighe, whose _Psyche_ Keats read with
pleasure; Constantia Grierson, a marvellous blue-stocking in her time;
Mrs. Hemans; pretty, charming ‘Perdita,’ who flirted alternately with
poetry and the Prince Regent, played divinely in the _Winter’s Tale_, was
brutally attacked by Gifford, and has left us a pathetic little poem on a
Snowdrop; and Emily Brontë, whose poems are instinct with tragic power,
and seem often on the verge of being great.

Old fashions in literature are not so pleasant as old fashions in dress.
I like the costume of the age of powder better than the poetry of the age
of Pope.  But if one adopts the historical standpoint—and this is,
indeed, the only standpoint from which we can ever form a fair estimate
of work that is not absolutely of the highest order—we cannot fail to see
that many of the English poetesses who preceded Mrs. Browning were women
of no ordinary talent, and that if the majority of them looked upon
poetry simply as a department of _belles lettres_, so in most cases did
their contemporaries.  Since Mrs. Browning’s day our woods have become
full of singing birds, and if I venture to ask them to apply themselves
more to prose and less to song, it is not that I like poetical prose, but
that I love the prose of poets.

There are certain problems in archæology that seem to possess a real
romantic interest, and foremost among these is the question of the
so-called Venus of Melos.  Who is she, this marble mutilated goddess whom
Gautier loved, to whom Heine bent his knee?  What sculptor wrought her,
and for what shrine?  Whose hands walled her up in that rude niche where
the Melian peasant found her?  What symbol of her divinity did she carry?
Was it apple of gold or shield of bronze?  Where is her city and what was
her name among gods and men?  The last writer on this fascinating subject
is Mr. Stillman, who in a most interesting book recently published in
America, claims that the work of art in question is no sea-born and
foam-born Aphrodite, but the very Victory Without Wings that once stood
in the little chapel outside the gates of the Acropolis at Athens.  So
long ago as 1826, that is to say six years after the discovery of the
statue, the Venus hypothesis was violently attacked by Millingen, and
from that time to this the battle of the archæologists has never ceased.
Mr. Stillman, who fights, of course, under Millingen’s banner, points out
that the statue is not of the Venus type at all, being far too heroic in
character to correspond to the Greek conception of Aphrodite at any
period of their artistic development, but that it agrees distinctly with
certain well-known statues of Victory, such as the celebrated ‘Victory of
Brescia.’  The latter is in bronze, is later, and has the wings, but the
type is unmistakable, and though not a reproduction it is certainly a
recollection of the Melian statue.  The representation of Victory on the
coin of Agathocles is also obviously of the Melian type, and in the
museum of Naples is a terra-cotta Victory in almost the identical action
and drapery.  As for Dumont d’Urville’s statement that, when the statue
was discovered, one hand held an apple and the other a fold of the
drapery, the latter is obviously a mistake, and the whole evidence on the
subject is so contradictory that no reliance can be placed on the
statement made by the French Consul and the French naval officers, none
of whom seems to have taken the trouble to ascertain whether the arm and
hand now in the Louvre were really found in the same niche as the statue
at all.  At any rate, these fragments seem to be of extremely inferior
workmanship, and they are so imperfect that they are quite worthless as
data for measure or opinion.  So far, Mr. Stillman is on old ground.  His
real artistic discovery is this.  In working about the Acropolis of
Athens, some years ago, he photographed among other sculptures the
mutilated Victories in the Temple of Nikè Apteros, the ‘Wingless
Victory,’ the little Ionic temple in which stood that statue of Victory
of which it was said that ‘_the Athenians made her without wings that she
might never leave Athens_.’  Looking over the photographs afterwards,
when the impression of the comparatively diminutive size had passed, he
was struck with the close resemblance of the type to that of the Melian
statue.  Now, this resemblance is so striking that it cannot be
questioned by any one who has an eye for form.  There are the same large
heroic proportions, the same ampleness of physical development, and the
same treatment of drapery, and there is also that perfect spiritual
kinship which, to any true antiquarian, is one of the most valuable modes
of evidence.  Now it is generally admitted on both sides that the Melian
statue is probably Attic in its origin, and belongs certainly to the
period between Phidias and Praxiteles, that is to say, to the age of
Scopas, if it be not actually the work of Scopas himself; and as it is to
Scopas that these bas-reliefs have been always attributed, the similarity
of style can, on Mr. Stillman’s hypothesis, be easily accounted for.

As regards the appearance of the statue in Melos, Mr. Stillman points out
that Melos belonged to Athens as late as she had any Greek allegiance,
and that it is probable that the statue was sent there for concealment on
the occasion of some siege or invasion.  When this took place, Mr.
Stillman does not pretend to decide with any degree of certainty, but it
is evident that it must have been subsequent to the establishment of the
Roman hegemony, as the brickwork of the niche in which the statue was
found is clearly Roman in character, and before the time of Pausanias and
Pliny, as neither of these antiquaries mentions the statue.  Accepting,
then, the statue as that of the Victory Without Wings, Mr. Stillman
agrees with Millingen in supposing that in her left hand she held a
bronze shield, the lower rim of which rested on the left knee where some
marks of the kind are easily recognizable, while with her right hand she
traced, or had just finished tracing, the names of the great heroes of
Athens.  Valentin’s objection, that if this were so the left thigh would
incline outwards so as to secure a balance, Mr. Stillman meets partly by
the analogy of the Victory of Brescia and partly by the evidence of
Nature herself; for he has had a model photographed in the same position
as the statue and holding a shield in the manner he proposes in his
restoration.  The result is precisely the contrary to that which Valentin
assumes.  Of course, Mr. Stillman’s solution of the whole matter must not
be regarded as an absolutely scientific demonstration.  It is simply an
induction in which a kind of artistic instinct, not communicable or
equally valuable to all people, has had the greatest part, but to this
mode of interpretation archæologists as a class have been far too
indifferent; and it is certain that in the present case it has given us a
theory which is most fruitful and suggestive.

The little temple of Nikè Apteros has had, as Mr. Stillman reminds us, a
destiny unique of its kind.  Like the Parthenon, it was standing little
more than two hundred years ago, but during the Turkish occupation it was
razed, and its stones all built into the great bastion which covered the
front of the Acropolis and blocked up the staircase to the Propylæa.  It
was dug out and restored, nearly every stone in its place, by two German
architects during the reign of Otho, and it stands again just as
Pausanias described it on the spot where old Ægeus watched for the return
of Theseus from Crete.  In the distance are Salamis and Ægina, and beyond
the purple hills lies Marathon.  If the Melian statue be indeed the
Victory Without Wings, she had no unworthy shrine.

There are some other interesting essays in Mr. Stillman’s book on the
wonderful topographical knowledge of Ithaca displayed in the _Odyssey_,
and discussions of this kind are always interesting as long as there is
no attempt to represent Homer as the ordinary literary man; but the
article on the Melian statue is by far the most important and the most
delightful.  Some people will, no doubt, regret the possibility of the
disappearance of the old name, and as Venus not as Victory will still
worship the stately goddess, but there are others who will be glad to see
in her the image and ideal of that spiritual enthusiasm to which Athens
owed her liberty, and by which alone can liberty be won.

The biography of a very great man from the pen of a very ladylike
writer—this is the best description we can give of M. Caro’s Life of
George Sand.  The late Professor of the Sorbonne could chatter charmingly
about culture, and had all the fascinating insincerity of an accomplished
phrase-maker; being an extremely superior person he had a great contempt
for Democracy and its doings, but he was always popular with the
Duchesses of the Faubourg, as there was nothing in history or in
literature that he could not explain away for their edification; having
never done anything remarkable he was naturally elected a member of the
Academy, and he always remained loyal to the traditions of that
thoroughly respectable and thoroughly pretentious institution.  In fact,
he was just the sort of man who should never have attempted to write a
Life of George Sand or to interpret George Sand’s genius.  He was too
feminine to appreciate the grandeur of that large womanly nature, too
much of a _dilettante_ to realize the masculine force of that strong and
ardent mind.  He never gets at the secret of George Sand, and never
brings us near to her wonderful personality.  He looks on her simply as a
littérateur, as a writer of pretty stories of country life and of
charming, if somewhat exaggerated, romances.  But George Sand was much
more than this.  Beautiful as are such books as _Consuelo_ and _Mauprat_,
_François le Champi_ and _La Mare au Diable_, yet in none of them is she
adequately expressed, by none of them is she adequately revealed.  As Mr.
Matthew Arnold said, many years ago, ‘We do not know George Sand unless
we feel the spirit which goes through her work as a whole.’  With this
spirit, however, M. Caro has no sympathy.  Madame Sand’s doctrines are
antediluvian, he tells us, her philosophy is quite dead and her ideas of
social regeneration are Utopian, incoherent and absurd.  The best thing
for us to do is to forget these silly dreams and to read _Teverino_ and
_Le Secrétaire Intime_.  Poor M. Caro!  This spirit, which he treats with
such airy flippancy, is the very leaven of modern life.  It is remoulding
the world for us and fashioning our age anew.  If it is antediluvian, it
is so because the deluge is yet to come; if it is Utopian, then Utopia
must be added to our geographies.  To what curious straits M. Caro is
driven by his violent prejudices may be estimated by the fact that he
tries to class George Sand’s novels with the old _Chansons de geste_, the
stories of adventure characteristic of primitive literatures; whereas in
using fiction as a vehicle of thought, and romance as a means of
influencing the social ideals of her age, George Sand was merely carrying
out the traditions of Voltaire and Rousseau, of Diderot and of
Chateaubriand.  The novel, says M. Caro, must be allied either to poetry
or to science.  That it has found in philosophy one of its strongest
allies seems not to have occurred to him.  In an English critic such a
view might possibly be excusable.  Our greatest novelists, such as
Fielding, Scott and Thackeray, cared little for the philosophy of their
age.  But coming, as it does, from a French critic, the statement seems
to show a strange want of recognition of one of the most important
elements of French fiction.  Nor, even in the narrow limits that he has
imposed upon himself, can M. Caro be said to be a very fortunate or
felicitous critic.  To take merely one instance out of many, he says
nothing of George Sand’s delightful treatment of art and the artist’s
life.  And yet how exquisitely does she analyse each separate art and
present it to us in its relation to life!  In _Consuelo_ she tells us of
music; in _Horace_ of authorship; in _Le Château des Désertes_ of acting;
in _Les Maîtres Mosaïstes_ of mosaic work; in _Le Château de Pictordu_ of
portrait painting; and in _La Daniella_ of the painting of landscape.
What Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Browning have done for England she did for
France.  She invented an art literature.  It is unnecessary, however, to
discuss any of M. Caro’s minor failings, for the whole effect of the
book, so far as it attempts to portray for us the scope and character of
George Sand’s genius, is entirely spoiled by the false attitude assumed
from the beginning, and though the dictum may seem to many harsh and
exclusive, we cannot help feeling that an absolute incapacity for
appreciating the spirit of a great writer is no qualification for writing
a treatise on the subject.

As for Madame Sand’s private life, which is so intimately connected with
her art (for, like Goethe, she had to live her romances before she could
write them), M. Caro says hardly anything about it.  He passes it over
with a modesty that almost makes one blush, and for fear of wounding the
susceptibilities of those _grandes dames_ whose passions M. Paul Bourget
analyses with such subtlety, he transforms her mother, who was a typical
French _grisette_, into ‘a very amiable and _spirituelle_ milliner’!  It
must be admitted that Joseph Surface himself could hardly show greater
tact and delicacy, though we ourselves must plead guilty to preferring
Madame Sand’s own description of her as an ‘enfant du vieux pavé de
Paris.’

Mr. Alan Cole’s carefully-edited translation of M. Lefébure’s history of
_Embroidery and Lace_ is one of the most fascinating books that has
appeared on this delightful subject.  M. Lefébure is one of the
administrators of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs at Paris, besides being a
lace manufacturer; and his work has not merely an important historical
value, but as a handbook of technical instruction it will be found of the
greatest service by all needle-women.  Indeed, as the translator himself
points out, M. Lefébure’s book suggests the question whether it is not
rather by the needle and the bobbin, than by the brush, the graver or the
chisel, that the influence of woman should assert itself in the arts.  In
Europe, at any rate, woman is sovereign in the domain of art-needlework,
and few men would care to dispute with her the right of using those
delicate implements so intimately associated with the dexterity of her
nimble and slender fingers; nor is there any reason why the productions
of embroidery should not, as Mr. Alan Cole suggests, be placed on the
same level with those of painting, engraving and sculpture, though there
must always be a great difference between those purely decorative arts
that glorify their own material and the more imaginative arts in which
the material is, as it were, annihilated, and absorbed into the creation
of a new form.  In the beautifying of modern houses it certainly must be
admitted—indeed, it should be more generally recognized than it is—that
rich embroidery on hangings and curtains, _portières_, couches and the
like, produces a far more decorative and far more artistic effect than
can be gained from our somewhat wearisome English practice of covering
the walls with pictures and engravings; and the almost complete
disappearance of embroidery from dress has robbed modern costume of one
of the chief elements of grace and fancy.

That, however, a great improvement has taken place in English embroidery
during the last ten or fifteen years cannot, I think, be denied.  It is
shown, not merely in the work of individual artists, such as Mrs.
Holiday, Miss May Morris and others, but also in the admirable
productions of the South Kensington School of Embroidery (the
best—indeed, the only real good—school that South Kensington has
produced).  It is pleasant to note on turning over the leaves of M.
Lefébure’s book, that in this we are merely carrying out certain old
traditions of Early English art.  In the seventh century, St. Ethelreda,
first abbess of the monastery of Ely, made an offering to St. Cuthbert of
a sacred ornament she had worked with gold and precious stones, and the
cope and maniple of St. Cuthbert, which are preserved at Durham, are
considered to be specimens of _opus Anglicanum_.  In the year 800, the
Bishop of Durham allotted the income of a farm of two hundred acres for
life to an embroideress named Eanswitha, in consideration of her keeping
in repair the vestments of the clergy in his diocese.  The battle
standard of King Alfred was embroidered by Danish Princesses; and the
Anglo-Saxon Gudric gave Alcuid a piece of land, on condition that she
instructed his daughter in needle-work.  Queen Mathilda bequeathed to the
Abbey of the Holy Trinity at Caen a tunic embroidered at Winchester by
the wife of one Alderet; and when William presented himself to the
English nobles, after the Battle of Hastings, he wore a mantle covered
with Anglo-Saxon embroideries, which is probably, M. Lefébure suggests,
the same as that mentioned in the inventory of the Bayeux Cathedral,
where, after the entry relating to the _broderie à telle_ (representing
the conquest of England), two mantles are described—one of King William,
‘all of gold, powdered with crosses and blossoms of gold, and edged along
the lower border with an orphrey of figures.’  The most splendid example
of the _opus Anglicanum_ now in existence is, of course, the Syon cope at
the South Kensington Museum; but English work seems to have been
celebrated all over the Continent.  Pope Innocent IV. so admired the
splendid vestments worn by the English clergy in 1246, that he ordered
similar articles from Cistercian monasteries in England.  St. Dunstan,
the artistic English monk, was known as a designer for embroideries; and
the stole of St. Thomas à Becket is still preserved in the cathedral at
Sens, and shows us the interlaced scroll-forms used by Anglo-Saxon MS.
illuminators.

How far this modern artistic revival of rich and delicate embroidery will
bear fruit depends, of course, almost entirely on the energy and study
that women are ready to devote to it; but I think that it must be
admitted that all our decorative arts in Europe at present have, at
least, this element of strength—that they are in immediate relationship
with the decorative arts of Asia.  Wherever we find in European history a
revival of decorative art, it has, I fancy, nearly always been due to
Oriental influence and contact with Oriental nations.  Our own keenly
intellectual art has more than once been ready to sacrifice real
decorative beauty either to imitative presentation or to ideal motive.
It has taken upon itself the burden of expression, and has sought to
interpret the secrets of thought and passion.  In its marvellous truth of
presentation it has found its strength, and yet its weakness is there
also.  It is never with impunity that an art seeks to mirror life.  If
Truth has her revenge upon those who do not follow her, she is often
pitiless to her worshippers.  In Byzantium the two arts met—Greek art,
with its intellectual sense of form, and its quick sympathy with
humanity; Oriental art, with its gorgeous materialism, its frank
rejection of imitation, its wonderful secrets of craft and colour, its
splendid textures, its rare metals and jewels, its marvellous and
priceless traditions.  They had, indeed, met before, but in Byzantium
they were married; and the sacred tree of the Persians, the palm of
Zoroaster, was embroidered on the hem of the garments of the Western
world.  Even the Iconoclasts, the Philistines of theological history,
who, in one of those strange outbursts of rage against Beauty that seem
to occur only amongst European nations, rose up against the wonder and
magnificence of the new art, served merely to distribute its secrets more
widely; and in the _Liber Pontificalis_, written in 687 by Athanasius,
the librarian, we read of an influx into Rome of gorgeous embroideries,
the work of men who had arrived from Constantinople and from Greece.  The
triumph of the Mussulman gave the decorative art of Europe a new
departure—that very principle of their religion that forbade the actual
representation of any object in nature being of the greatest artistic
service to them, though it was not, of course, strictly carried out.  The
Saracens introduced into Sicily the art of weaving silken and golden
fabrics; and from Sicily the manufacture of fine stuffs spread to the
North of Italy, and became localized in Genoa, Florence, Venice, and
other towns.  A still greater art-movement took place in Spain under the
Moors and Saracens, who brought over workmen from Persia to make
beautiful things for them.  M. Lefébure tells us of Persian embroidery
penetrating as far as Andalusia; and Almeria, like Palermo, had its Hôtel
des Tiraz, which rivalled the Hôtel des Tiraz at Bagdad, _tiraz_ being
the generic name for ornamental tissues and costumes made with them.
Spangles (those pretty little discs of gold, silver, or polished steel,
used in certain embroidery for dainty glinting effects) were a Saracenic
invention; and Arabic letters often took the place of letters in the
Roman characters for use in inscriptions upon embroidered robes and
Middle Age tapestries, their decorative value being so much greater.  The
book of crafts by Etienne Boileau, provost of the merchants in 1258–1268,
contains a curious enumeration of the different craft-guilds of Paris,
among which we find ‘the tapiciers, or makers of the _tapis sarrasinois_
(or Saracen cloths), who say that their craft is for the service only of
churches, or great men like kings and counts’; and, indeed, even in our
own day, nearly all our words descriptive of decorative textures and
decorative methods point to an Oriental origin.  What the inroads of the
Mohammedans did for Sicily and Spain, the return of the Crusaders did for
the other countries of Europe.  The nobles who left for Palestine clad in
armour, came back in the rich stuffs of the East; and their costumes,
pouches (_aumônières sarrasinoises_), and caparisons excited the
admiration of the needle-workers of the West.  Matthew Paris says that at
the sacking of Antioch, in 1098, gold, silver and priceless costumes were
so equally distributed among the Crusaders, that many who the night
before were famishing and imploring relief, suddenly found themselves
overwhelmed with wealth; and Robert de Clair tells us of the wonderful
fêtes that followed the capture of Constantinople.  The thirteenth
century, as M. Lefébure points out, was conspicuous for an increased
demand in the West for embroidery.  Many Crusaders made offerings to
churches of plunder from Palestine; and St. Louis, on his return from the
first Crusade, offered thanks at St. Denis to God for mercies bestowed on
him during his six years’ absence and travel, and presented some richly
embroidered stuffs to be used on great occasions as coverings to the
reliquaries containing the relics of holy martyrs.  European embroidery,
having thus become possessed of new materials and wonderful methods,
developed on its own intellectual and imitative lines, inclining, as it
went on, to the purely pictorial, and seeking to rival painting, and to
produce landscapes and figure-subjects with elaborate perspective and
subtle aerial effects.  A fresh Oriental influence, however, came through
the Dutch and the Portuguese, and the famous _Compagnie des Grandes
Indes_; and M. Lefébure gives an illustration of a door-hanging now in
the Cluny Museum, where we find the French _fleurs-de-lys_ intermixed
with Indian ornament.  The hangings of Madame de Maintenon’s room at
Fontainebleau, which were embroidered at St. Cyr, represent Chinese
scenery upon a jonquil-yellow ground.

Clothes were sent out ready cut to the East to be embroidered, and many
of the delightful coats of the period of Louis XV. and Louis XVI. owe
their dainty decoration to the needles of Chinese artists.  In our own
day the influence of the East is strongly marked.  Persia has sent us her
carpets for patterns, and Cashmere her lovely shawls, and India her
dainty muslins finely worked with gold thread palmates, and stitched over
with iridescent beetles’ wings.  We are beginning now to dye by Oriental
methods, and the silk robes of China and Japan have taught us new wonders
of colour-combination, and new subtleties of delicate design.  Whether we
have yet learned to make a wise use of what we have acquired is less
certain.  If books produce an effect, this book of M. Lefébure should
certainly make us study with still deeper interest the whole question of
embroidery, and by those who already work with their needles it will be
found full of most fertile suggestion and most admirable advice.

Even to read of the marvellous works of embroidery that were fashioned in
bygone ages is pleasant.  Time has kept a few fragments of Greek
embroidery of the fourth century B.C. for us.  One is figured in M.
Lefébure’s book—a chain-stitch embroidery of yellow flax upon a
mulberry-coloured worsted material, with graceful spirals and
palmetto-patterns: and another, a tapestried cloth powdered with ducks,
was reproduced in the _Woman’s World_ some months ago for an article by
Mr. Alan Cole. {115}  Now and then we find in the tomb of some dead
Egyptian a piece of delicate work.  In the treasury at Ratisbon is
preserved a specimen of Byzantine embroidery on which the Emperor
Constantine is depicted riding on a white palfrey, and receiving homage
from the East and West.  Metz has a red silk cope wrought with great
eagles, the gift of Charlemagne, and Bayeux the needle-wrought epic of
Queen Matilda.  But where is the great crocus-coloured robe, wrought for
Athena, on which the gods fought against the giants?  Where is the huge
velarium that Nero stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, on which was
represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a chariot drawn by steeds?
How one would like to see the curious table-napkins wrought for
Heliogabalus, on which were displayed all the dainties and viands that
could be wanted for a feast; or the mortuary-cloth of King Chilperic,
with its three hundred golden bees; or the fantastic robes that excited
the indignation of the Bishop of Pontus, and were embroidered with
‘lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests, rocks, hunters—all, in fact, that
painters can copy from nature.’  Charles of Orleans had a coat, on the
sleeves of which were embroidered the verses of a song beginning
‘_Madame_, _je suis tout joyeux_,’ the musical accompaniment of the words
being wrought in gold thread, and each note, of square shape in those
days, formed with four pearls. {116}  The room prepared in the palace at
Rheims for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy was decorated with ‘thirteen
hundred and twenty-one _papegauts_ (parrots) made in broidery and
blazoned with the King’s arms, and five hundred and sixty-one
butterflies, whose wings were similarly ornamented with the Queen’s
arms—the whole worked in fine gold.’  Catherine de Medicis had a
mourning-bed made for her ‘of black velvet embroidered with pearls and
powdered with crescents and suns.’  Its curtains were of damask, ‘with
leafy wreaths and garlands figured upon a gold and silver ground, and
fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls,’ and it stood in a
room hung with rows of the Queen’s devices in cut black velvet on cloth
of silver.  Louis XIV. had gold-embroidered caryatides fifteen feet high
in his apartment.  The state bed of Sobieski, King of Poland, was made of
Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises and pearls, with verses
from the Koran; its supports were of silver-gilt, beautifully chased and
profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.  He had taken it
from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of Mahomet had
stood under it.  The Duchess de la Ferté wore a dress of reddish-brown
velvet, the skirt of which, adjusted in graceful folds, was held up by
big butterflies made of Dresden china; the front was a _tablier_ of cloth
of silver, upon which was embroidered an orchestra of musicians arranged
in a pyramidal group, consisting of a series of six ranks of performers,
with beautiful instruments wrought in raised needle-work.  ‘Into the
night go one and all,’ as Mr. Henley sings in his charming _Ballade of
Dead Actors_.

Many of the facts related by M. Lefébure about the embroiderers’ guilds
are also extremely interesting.  Etienne Boileau, in his book of crafts,
to which I have already alluded, tells us that a member of the guild was
prohibited from using gold of less value than ‘eight sous (about 6s.) the
skein; he was bound to use the best silk, and never to mix thread with
silk, because that made the work false and bad.’  The test or trial piece
prescribed for a worker who was the son of a master-embroiderer was ‘a
single figure, a sixth of the natural size, to be shaded in gold’; whilst
one not the son of a master was required to produce ‘a complete incident
with many figures.’  The book of crafts also mentions ‘cutters-out and
stencillers and illuminators’ amongst those employed in the industry of
embroidery.  In 1551 the Parisian Corporation of Embroiderers issued a
notice that ‘for the future, the colouring in representations of nude
figures and faces should be done in three or four gradations of
carnation-dyed silk, and not, as formerly, in white silks.’  During the
fifteenth century every household of any position retained the services
of an embroiderer by the year.  The preparation of colours also, whether
for painting or for dyeing threads and textile fabrics, was a matter
which, M. Lefébure points out, received close attention from the artists
of the Middle Ages.  Many undertook long journeys to obtain the more
famous recipes, which they filed, subsequently adding to and correcting
them as experience dictated.  Nor were great artists above making and
supplying designs for embroidery.  Raphael made designs for Francis I.,
and Boucher for Louis XV.; and in the Ambras collection at Vienna is a
superb set of sacerdotal robes from designs by the brothers Van Eyck and
their pupils.  Early in the sixteenth century books of embroidery designs
were produced, and their success was so great that in a few years French,
German, Italian, Flemish, and English publishers spread broadcast books
of design made by their best engravers.  In the same century, in order to
give the designers opportunity of studying directly from nature, Jean
Robin opened a garden with conservatories, in which he cultivated strange
varieties of plants then but little known in our latitudes.  The rich
brocades and brocadelles of the time are characterized by the
introduction of large flowery patterns, with pomegranates and other
fruits with fine foliage.

The second part of M. Lefébure’s book is devoted to the history of lace,
and though some may not find it quite as interesting as the earlier
portion it will more than repay perusal; and those who still work in this
delicate and fanciful art will find many valuable suggestions in it, as
well as a large number of exceedingly beautiful designs.  Compared to
embroidery, lace seems comparatively modern.  M. Lefébure and Mr. Alan
Cole tell us that there is no reliable or documentary evidence to prove
the existence of lace before the fifteenth century.  Of course in the
East, light tissues, such as gauzes, muslins, and nets, were made at very
early times, and were used as veils and scarfs after the manner of
subsequent laces, and women enriched them with some sort of embroidery,
or varied the openness of them by here and there drawing out threads.
The threads of fringes seem also to have been plaited and knotted
together, and the borders of one of the many fashions of Roman toga were
of open reticulated weaving.  The Egyptian Museum at the Louvre has a
curious network embellished with glass beads; and the monk Reginald, who
took part in opening the tomb of St. Cuthbert at Durham in the twelfth
century, writes that the Saint’s shroud had a fringe of linen threads an
inch long, surmounted by a border, ‘worked upon the threads,’ with
representations of birds and pairs of beasts, there being between each
such pair a branching tree, a survival of the palm of Zoroaster, to which
I have before alluded.  Our authors, however, do not in these examples
recognize lace, the production of which involves more refined and
artistic methods, and postulates a combination of skill and varied
execution carried to a higher degree of perfection.  Lace, as we know it,
seems to have had its origin in the habit of embroidering linen.  White
embroidery on linen has, M. Lefébure remarks, a cold and monotonous
aspect; that with coloured threads is brighter and gayer in effect, but
is apt to fade in frequent washing; but white embroidery relieved by open
spaces in, or shapes cut from, the linen ground, is possessed of an
entirely new charm; and from a sense of this the birth may be traced of
an art in the result of which happy contrasts are effected between
ornamental details of close texture and others of open-work.

Soon, also, was suggested the idea that, instead of laboriously
withdrawing threads from stout linen, it would be more convenient to
introduce a needle-made pattern into an open network ground, which was
called a _lacis_.  Of this kind of embroidery many specimens are extant.
The Cluny Museum possesses a linen cap said to have belonged to Charles
V.; and an alb of linen drawn-thread work, supposed to have been made by
Anne of Bohemia (1527), is preserved in the cathedral at Prague.
Catherine de Medicis had a bed draped with squares of _réseuil_, or
_lacis_, and it is recorded that ‘the girls and servants of her household
consumed much time in making squares of _réseuil_.’  The interesting
pattern-books for open-ground embroidery, of which the first was
published in 1527 by Pierre Quinty, of Cologne, supply us with the means
of tracing the stages in the transition from white thread embroidery to
needle-point lace.  We meet in them with a style of needle-work which
differs from embroidery in not being wrought upon a stuff foundation.  It
is, in fact, true lace, done, as it were, ‘in the air,’ both ground and
pattern being entirely produced by the lace-maker.

The elaborate use of lace in costume was, of course, largely stimulated
by the fashion of wearing ruffs, and their companion cuffs or sleeves.
Catherine de Medicis induced one Frederic Vinciolo to come from Italy and
make ruffs and gadrooned collars, the fashion of which she started in
France; and Henry III. was so punctilious over his ruffs that he would
iron and goffer his cuffs and collars himself rather than see their
pleats limp and out of shape.  The pattern-books also gave a great
impulse to the art.  M. Lefébure mentions German books with patterns of
eagles, heraldic emblems, hunting scenes, and plants and leaves belonging
to Northern vegetation; and Italian books, in which the _motifs_ consist
of oleander blossoms, and elegant wreaths and scrolls, landscapes with
mythological scenes, and hunting episodes, less realistic than the
Northern ones, in which appear fauns, and nymphs or _amorini_ shooting
arrows.  With regard to these patterns, M. Lefébure notices a curious
fact.  The oldest painting in which lace is depicted is that of a lady,
by Carpaccio, who died about 1523.  The cuffs of the lady are edged with
a narrow lace, the pattern of which reappears in Vecellio’s _Corona_, a
book not published until 1591.  This particular pattern was, therefore,
in use at least eighty years before it got into circulation with other
published patterns.

It was not, however, till the seventeenth century that lace acquired a
really independent character and individuality, and M. Duplessis states
that the production of the more noteworthy of early laces owes more to
the influence of men than to that of women.  The reign of Louis XIV.
witnessed the production of the most stately needle-point laces, the
transformation of Venetian point, and the growth of _Points d’Alençon_,
_d’Argentan_, _de Bruxelles_ and _d’Angleterre_.

The king, aided by Colbert, determined to make France the centre, if
possible, for lace manufacture, sending for this purpose both to Venice
and to Flanders for workers.  The studio of the Gobelins supplied
designs.  The dandies had their huge rabatos or bands falling from
beneath the chin over the breast, and great prelates, like Bossuet and
Fénelon, wore their wonderful albs and rochets.  It is related of a
collar made at Venice for Louis XIV. that the lace-workers, being unable
to find sufficiently fine horse-hair, employed some of their own hairs
instead, in order to secure that marvellous delicacy of work which they
aimed at producing.

In the eighteenth century, Venice, finding that laces of lighter texture
were sought after, set herself to make rose-point; and at the Court of
Louis XV. the choice of lace was regulated by still more elaborate
etiquette.  The Revolution, however, ruined many of the manufactures.
Alençon survived, and Napoleon encouraged it, and endeavoured to renew
the old rules about the necessity of wearing point-lace at Court
receptions.  A wonderful piece of lace, powdered over with devices of
bees, and costing 40,000 francs, was ordered.  It was begun for the
Empress Josephine, but in the course of its making her escutcheons were
replaced by those of Marie Louise.

M. Lefébure concludes his interesting history by stating very clearly his
attitude towards machine-made lace.  ‘It would be an obvious loss to
art,’ he says, ‘should the making of lace by hand become extinct, for
machinery, as skilfully devised as possible, cannot do what the hand
does.’  It can give us ‘the results of processes, not the creations of
artistic handicraft.’  Art is absent ‘where formal calculation pretends
to supersede emotion’; it is absent ‘where no trace can be detected of
intelligence guiding handicraft, whose hesitancies even possess peculiar
charm . . . cheapness is never commendable in respect of things which are
not absolute necessities; it lowers artistic standard.’  These are
admirable remarks, and with them we take leave of this fascinating book,
with its delightful illustrations, its charming anecdotes, its excellent
advice.  Mr. Alan Cole deserves the thanks of all who are interested in
art for bringing this book before the public in so attractive and so
inexpensive a form.

‘If I were king,’ says Mr. Henley, in one of his most modest rondeaus,

And these lines contain, if not the best criticism of his own work,
certainly a very complete statement of his aim and motive as a poet.  His
little _Book of Verses_ reveals to us an artist who is seeking to find
new methods of expression and has not merely a delicate sense of beauty
and a brilliant, fantastic wit, but a real passion also for what is
horrible, ugly, or grotesque.  No doubt, everything that is worthy of
existence is worthy also of art—at least, one would like to think so—but
while echo or mirror can repeat for us a beautiful thing, to render
artistically a thing that is ugly requires the most exquisite alchemy of
form, the most subtle magic of transformation.  To me there is more of
the cry of Marsyas than of the singing of Apollo in the earlier poems of
Mr. Henley’s volume, _In Hospital_: _Rhymes and Rhythms_, as he calls
them.  But it is impossible to deny their power.  Some of them are like
bright, vivid pastels; others like charcoal drawings, with dull blacks
and murky whites; others like etchings with deeply-bitten lines, and
abrupt contrasts, and clever colour-suggestions.  In fact, they are like
anything and everything, except perfected poems—that they certainly are
not.  They are still in the twilight.  They are preludes, experiments,
inspired jottings in a note-book, and should be heralded by a design of
‘Genius Making Sketches.’  Rhyme gives architecture as well as melody to
verse; it gives that delightful sense of limitation which in all the arts
is so pleasurable, and is, indeed, one of the secrets of perfection; it
will whisper, as a French critic has said, ‘things unexpected and
charming, things with strange and remote relations to each other,’ and
bind them together in indissoluble bonds of beauty; and in his constant
rejection of rhyme, Mr. Henley seems to me to have abdicated half his
power.  He is a _roi en exil_ who has thrown away some of the strings of
his lute; a poet who has forgotten the fairest part of his kingdom.

However, all work criticizes itself.  Here is one of Mr. Henley’s
inspired jottings.  According to the temperament of the reader, it will
serve either as a model or as the reverse:

In this poem, the rhythm and the music, such as it is, are
obvious—perhaps a little too obvious.  In the following I see nothing but
ingeniously printed prose.  It is a description—and a very accurate
one—of a scene in a hospital ward.  The medical students are supposed to
be crowding round the doctor.  What I quote is only a fragment, but the
poem itself is a fragment:

Théophile Gautier once said that Flaubert’s style was meant to be read,
and his own style to be looked at.  Mr. Henley’s unrhymed rhythms form
very dainty designs, from a typographical point of view.  From the point
of view of literature, they are a series of vivid, concentrated
impressions, with a keen grip of fact, a terrible actuality, and an
almost masterly power of picturesque presentation.  But the poetic
form—what of that?

Well, let us pass to the later poems, to the rondels and rondeaus, the
sonnets and quatorzains, the echoes and the ballades.  How brilliant and
fanciful this is!  The Toyokuni colour-print that suggested it could not
be more delightful.  It seems to have kept all the wilful fantastic charm
of the original:

This rondel, too—how light it is, and graceful!—

  There are fine verses, also, scattered through this little book; some of
them very strong, as—

Others with a true touch of romance, as—

And here and there we come across such felicitous phrases as—

or—

and many other graceful or fanciful lines, even ‘the green sky’s minor
thirds’ being perfectly right in its place, and a very refreshing bit of
affectation in a volume where there is so much that is natural.

However, Mr. Henley is not to be judged by samples.  Indeed, the most
attractive thing in the book is no single poem that is in it, but the
strong humane personality that stands behind both flawless and faulty
work alike, and looks out through many masks, some of them beautiful, and
some grotesque, and not a few misshapen.  In the case with most of our
modern poets, when we have analysed them down to an adjective, we can go
no further, or we care to go no further; but with this book it is
different.  Through these reeds and pipes blows the very breath of life.
It seems as if one could put one’s hand upon the singer’s heart and count
its pulsations.  There is something wholesome, virile and sane about the
man’s soul.  Anybody can be reasonable, but to be sane is not common; and
sane poets are as rare as blue lilies, though they may not be quite so
delightful.

is the concluding stanza of the last rondeau—indeed, of the last poem in
the collection, and the high, serene temper displayed in these lines
serves at once as keynote and keystone to the book.  The very lightness
and slightness of so much of the work, its careless moods and casual
fancies, seem to suggest a nature that is not primarily interested in
art—a nature, like Sordello’s, passionately enamoured of life, one to
which lyre and lute are things of less importance.  From this mere joy of
living, this frank delight in experience for its own sake, this lofty
indifference, and momentary unregretted ardours, come all the faults and
all the beauties of the volume.  But there is this difference between
them—the faults are deliberate, and the result of much study; the
beauties have the air of fascinating impromptus.  Mr. Henley’s healthy,
if sometimes misapplied, confidence in the myriad suggestions of life
gives him his charm.  He is made to sing along the highways, not to sit
down and write.  If he took himself more seriously, his work would become
trivial.

In a recent article on _English Poetesses_, I ventured to suggest that
our women of letters should turn their attention somewhat more to prose
and somewhat less to poetry.  Women seem to me to possess just what our
literature wants—a light touch, a delicate hand, a graceful mode of
treatment, and an unstudied felicity of phrase.  We want some one who
will do for our prose what Madame de Sévigné did for the prose of France.
George Eliot’s style was far too cumbrous, and Charlotte Brontë’s too
exaggerated.  However, one must not forget that amongst the women of
England there have been some charming letter-writers, and certainly no
book can be more delightful reading than Mrs. Ross’s _Three Generations
of English Women_, which has recently appeared.  The three Englishwomen
whose memoirs and correspondence Mrs. Ross has so admirably edited are
Mrs. John Taylor, Mrs. Sarah Austin, and Lady Duff Gordon, all of them
remarkable personalities, and two of them women of brilliant wit and
European reputation.  Mrs. Taylor belonged to that great Norwich family
about whom the Duke of Sussex remarked that they reversed the ordinary
saying that it takes nine tailors to make a man, and was for many years
one of the most distinguished figures in the famous society of her native
town.  Her only daughter married John Austin, the great authority on
jurisprudence, and her _salon_ in Paris was the centre of the intellect
and culture of her day.  Lucie Duff Gordon, the only child of John and
Sarah Austin, inherited the talents of her parents.  A beauty, a _femme
d’esprit_, a traveller, and clever writer, she charmed and fascinated her
age, and her premature death in Egypt was really a loss to our
literature.  It is to her daughter that we owe this delightful volume of
memoirs.

First we are introduced to Mrs. Ross’s great-grandmother, Mrs. Taylor,
who ‘was called, by her intimate friends, “Madame Roland of Norwich,”
from her likeness to the portraits of the handsome and unfortunate
Frenchwoman.’  We hear of her darning her boy’s grey worsted stockings
while holding her own with Southey and Brougham, and dancing round the
Tree of Liberty with Dr. Parr when the news of the fall of the Bastille
was first known.  Amongst her friends were Sir James Mackintosh, the most
popular man of the day, ‘to whom Madame de Staël wrote, “Il n’y a pas de
société sans vous.”  “C’est très ennuyeux de dîner sans vous; la société
ne va pas quand vous n’êtes pas là”;’ Sir James Smith, the botanist;
Crabb Robinson; the Gurneys; Mrs. Barbauld; Dr. Alderson and his charming
daughter, Amelia Opie; and many other well-known people.  Her letters are
extremely sensible and thoughtful.  ‘Nothing at present,’ she says in one
of them, ‘suits my taste so well as Susan’s Latin lessons, and her
philosophical old master. . . . When we get to Cicero’s discussions on
the nature of the soul, or Virgil’s fine descriptions, my mind is filled
up.  Life is either a dull round of eating, drinking, and sleeping, or a
spark of ethereal fire just kindled. . . . The character of girls must
depend upon their reading as much as upon the company they keep.  Besides
the intrinsic pleasure to be derived from solid knowledge, a woman ought
to consider it as her best resource against poverty.’  This is a somewhat
caustic aphorism: ‘A romantic woman is a troublesome friend, as she
expects you to be as impudent as herself, and is mortified at what she
calls coldness and insensibility.’  And this is admirable: ‘The art of
life is not to estrange oneself from society, and yet not to pay too dear
for it.’  This, too, is good: ‘Vanity, like curiosity, is wanted as a
stimulus to exertion; indolence would certainly get the better of us if
it were not for these two powerful principles’; and there is a keen touch
of humour in the following: ‘Nothing is so gratifying as the idea that
virtue and philanthropy are becoming fashionable.’  Dr. James Martineau,
in a letter to Mrs. Ross, gives us a pleasant picture of the old lady
returning from market ‘weighted by her huge basket, with the shank of a
leg of mutton thrust out to betray its contents,’ and talking divinely
about philosophy, poets, politics, and every intellectual topic of the
day.  She was a woman of admirable good sense, a type of Roman matron,
and quite as careful as were the Roman matrons to keep up the purity of
her native tongue.

Mrs. Taylor, however, was more or less limited to Norwich.  Mrs. Austin
was for the world.  In London, Paris, and Germany, she ruled and
dominated society, loved by every one who knew her.  ‘She is “My best and
brightest” to Lord Jeffrey; “Dear, fair and wise” to Sydney Smith; “My
great ally” to Sir James Stephen; “Sunlight through waste weltering
chaos” to Thomas Carlyle (while he needed her aid); “La petite mère du
genre humain” to Michael Chevalier; “Liebes Mütterlein” to John Stuart
Mill; and “My own Professorin” to Charles Buller, to whom she taught
German, as well as to the sons of Mr. James Mill.’  Jeremy Bentham, when
on his deathbed, gave her a ring with his portrait and some of his hair
let in behind.  ‘There, my dear,’ he said, ‘it is the only ring I ever
gave a woman.’  She corresponded with Guizot, Barthelemy de St. Hilaire,
the Grotes, Dr. Whewell, the Master of Trinity, Nassau Senior, the
Duchesse d’Orléans, Victor Cousin, and many other distinguished people.
Her translation of Ranke’s _History of the Popes_ is admirable; indeed,
all her literary work was thoroughly well done, and her edition of her
husband’s _Province of Jurisprudence_ deserves the very highest praise.
Two people more unlike than herself and her husband it would have been
difficult to find.  He was habitually grave and despondent; she was
brilliantly handsome, fond of society, in which she shone, and ‘with an
almost superabundance of energy and animal spirits,’ Mrs. Ross tells us.
She married him because she thought him perfect, but he never produced
the work of which he was worthy, and of which she knew him to be worthy.
Her estimate of him in the preface to the _Jurisprudence_ is wonderfully
striking and simple.  ‘He was never sanguine.  He was intolerant of any
imperfection.  He was always under the control of severe love of truth.
He lived and died a poor man.’  She was terribly disappointed in him, but
she loved him.  Some years after his death, she wrote to M. Guizot:

The most interesting letters in the book are certainly those to M.
Guizot, with whom she maintained the closest intellectual friendship; but
there is hardly one of them that does not contain something clever, or
thoughtful, or witty, while those addressed to her, in turn, are very
interesting.  Carlyle writes her letters full of lamentations, the wail
of a Titan in pain, superbly exaggerated for literary effect.

Henri Beyle (Stendhal), the great, I am often tempted to think the
greatest of French novelists, writes her a charming letter about
_nuances_.  ‘It seems to me,’ he says, ‘that except when they read
Shakespeare, Byron, or Sterne, no Englishman understands “_nuances_”; we
adore them.  A fool says to a woman “I love you”; the words mean nothing,
he might as well say “Olli Batachor”; it is the _nuance_ which gives
force to the meaning.’  In 1839 Mrs. Austin writes to Victor Cousin: ‘I
have seen young Gladstone, a distinguished Tory who wants to re-establish
education based on the Church in quite a Catholic form’; and we find her
corresponding with Mr. Gladstone on the subject of education.  ‘If you
are strong enough to provide motives and checks,’ she says to him, ‘you
may do two blessed acts—reform your clergy and teach your people.  As it
is, how few of them conceive what it is to teach a people’!  Mr.
Gladstone replies at great length, and in many letters, from which we may
quote this passage:

Lord Jeffrey has a very curious and suggestive letter on popular
education, in which he denies, or at least doubts, the effect of this
education on morals.  He, however, supports it on the ground ‘that it
will increase the enjoyment of individuals,’ which is certainly a very
sensible claim.  Humboldt writes to her about an old Indian language
which was preserved by a parrot, the tribe who spoke it having been
exterminated, and about ‘young Darwin,’ who had just published his first
book.  Here are some extracts from her own letters:

In politics Mrs. Austin was a philosophical Tory.  Radicalism she
detested, and she and most of her friends seem to have regarded it as
moribund.  ‘The Radical party is evidently effete,’ she writes to M.
Victor Cousin; the probable ‘leader of the Tory party’ is Mr. Gladstone.
‘The people must be instructed, must be guided, must be, in short,
governed,’ she writes elsewhere; and in a letter to Dr. Whewell, she says
that the state of things in France fills ‘me with the deepest anxiety on
one point,—the point on which the permanency of our institutions and our
salvation as a nation turn.  Are our higher classes able to keep the lead
of the rest?  If they are, we are safe; if not, I agree with my poor dear
Charles Buller—_our_ turn must come.  Now Cambridge and Oxford must
really look to this.’  The belief in the power of the Universities to
stem the current of democracy is charming.  She grew to regard Carlyle as
‘one of the dissolvents of the age—as mischievous as his extravagances
will let him be’; speaks of Kingsley and Maurice as ‘pernicious’; and
talks of John Stuart Mill as a ‘demagogue.’  She was no _doctrinaire_.
‘One ounce of education demanded is worth a pound imposed.  It is no use
to give the meat before you give the hunger.’  She was delighted at a
letter of St. Hilaire’s, in which he said, ‘We have a system and no
results; you have results and no system.’  Yet she had a deep sympathy
with the wants of the people.  She was horrified at something Babbage
told her of the population of some of the manufacturing towns who are
_worked out_ before they attain to thirty years of age.  ‘But I am
persuaded that the remedy will not, cannot come from the people,’ she
adds.  Many of her letters are concerned with the question of the higher
education of women.  She discusses Buckle’s lecture on ‘The Influence of
Women upon the Progress of Knowledge,’ admits to M. Guizot that women’s
intellectual life is largely coloured by the emotions, but adds: ‘One is
not precisely a fool because one’s opinions are greatly influenced by
one’s affections.  The opinions of men are often influenced by worse
things.’  Dr. Whewell consults her about lecturing women on Plato, being
slightly afraid lest people should think it ridiculous; Comte writes her
elaborate letters on the relation of women to progress; and Mr. Gladstone
promises that Mrs. Gladstone will carry out at Hawarden the suggestions
contained in one of her pamphlets.  She was always very practical, and
never lost her admiration for plain sewing.

All through the book we come across interesting and amusing things.  She
gets St. Hilaire to order a large, sensible bonnet for her in Paris,
which was at once christened the ‘Aristotelian,’ and was supposed to be
the only useful bonnet in England.  Grote has to leave Paris after the
_coup d’état_, he tells her, because he cannot bear to see the
establishment of a Greek tyrant.  Alfred de Vigny, Macaulay, John
Stirling, Southey, Alexis de Tocqueville, Hallam, and Jean Jacques Ampère
all contribute to these pleasant pages.  She seems to have inspired the
warmest feelings of friendship in those who knew her.  Guizot writes to
her: ‘Madame de Staël used to say that the best thing in the world was a
serious Frenchman.  I turn the compliment, and say that the best thing in
the world is an affectionate Englishman.  How much more an Englishwoman!
Given equal qualities, a woman is always more charming than a man.’

Lucie Austin, afterwards Lady Duff Gordon, was born in 1821.  Her chief
playfellow was John Stuart Mill, and Jeremy Bentham’s garden was her
playground.  She was a lovely, romantic child, who was always wanting the
flowers to talk to her, and used to invent the most wonderful stories
about animals, of whom she was passionately fond.  In 1834 Mrs. Austin
decided on leaving England, and Sydney Smith wrote his immortal letter to
the little girl:

At Boulogne she sat next Heine at _table d’hôte_.  ‘He heard me speak
German to my mother, and soon began to talk to me, and then said, “When
you go back to England, you can tell your friends that you have seen
Heinrich Heine.”  I replied, “And who is Heinrich Heine?”  He laughed
heartily and took no offence at my ignorance; and we used to lounge on
the end of the pier together, where he told me stories in which fish,
mermaids, water-sprites and a very funny old French fiddler with a poodle
were mixed up in the most fanciful manner, sometimes humorous, and very
often pathetic, especially when the water-sprites brought him greetings
from the “Nord See.”  He was . . . so kind to me and so sarcastic to
every one else.’  Twenty years afterwards the little girl whose ‘braune
Augen’ Heine had celebrated in his charming poem _Wenn ick an deinem
Hause_, used to go and see the dying poet in Paris.  ‘It does one good,’
he said to her, ‘to see a woman who does not carry about a broken heart,
to be mended by all sorts of men, like the women here, who do not see
that a total want of heart is their real failing.’  On another occasion
he said to her: ‘I have now made peace with the whole world, and at last
also with God, who sends thee to me as a beautiful angel of death: I
shall certainly soon die.’  Lady Duff Gordon said to him: ‘Poor Poet, do
you still retain such splendid illusions, that you transform a travelling
Englishwoman into Azrael?  That used not to be the case, for you always
disliked us.’  He answered: ‘Yes, I do not know what possessed me to
dislike the English, . . . it really was only petulance; I never hated
them, indeed, I never knew them.  I was only once in England, but knew no
one, and found London very dreary, and the people and the streets odious.
But England has revenged herself well; she has sent me most excellent
friends—thyself and Milnes, that good Milnes.’

There are delightful letters from Dicky Doyle here, with the most amusing
drawings, one of the present Sir Robert Peel as he made his maiden speech
in the House being excellent; and the various descriptions of Hassan’s
performances are extremely amusing.  Hassan was a black boy, who had been
turned away by his master because he was going blind, and was found by
Lady Duff Gordon one night sitting on her doorstep.  She took care of
him, and had him cured, and he seems to have been a constant source of
delight to every one.  On one occasion, ‘when Prince Louis Napoleon (the
late Emperor of the French) came in unexpectedly, he gravely said:
“Please, my lady, I ran out and bought twopennyworth of sprats for the
Prince, and for the honour of the house.”’  Here is an amusing letter
from Mrs. Norton:

Lady Duff Gordon’s _Letters from the Cape_, and her brilliant translation
of _The Amber Witch_, are, of course, well known.  The latter book was,
with Lady Wilde’s translation of _Sidonia the Sorceress_, my favourite
romantic reading when a boy.  Her letters from Egypt are wonderfully
vivid and picturesque.  Here is an interesting bit of art criticism:

Mrs. Ross has certainly produced a most fascinating volume, and her book
is one of the books of the season.  It is edited with tact and judgment.

Prison has had an admirable effect on Mr. Wilfrid Blunt as a poet.  The
_Love Sonnets of Proteus_, in spite of their clever Musset-like
modernities and their swift brilliant wit, were but affected or fantastic
at best.  They were simply the records of passing moods and moments, of
which some were sad and others sweet, and not a few shameful.  Their
subject was not of high or serious import.  They contained much that was
wilful and weak.  In _Vinculis_, upon the other hand, is a book that
stirs one by its fine sincerity of purpose, its lofty and impassioned
thought, its depth and ardour of intense feeling.  ‘Imprisonment,’ says
Mr. Blunt in his preface, ‘is a reality of discipline most useful to the
modern soul, lapped as it is in physical sloth and self-indulgence.  Like
a sickness or a spiritual retreat it purifies and ennobles; and the soul
emerges from it stronger and more self-contained.’  To him, certainly, it
has been a mode of purification.  The opening sonnets, composed in the
bleak cell of Galway Gaol, and written down on the flyleaves of the
prisoner’s prayer-book, are full of things nobly conceived and nobly
uttered, and show that though Mr. Balfour may enforce ‘plain living’ by
his prison regulations, he cannot prevent ‘high thinking’ or in any way
limit or constrain the freedom of a man’s soul.  They are, of course,
intensely personal in expression.  They could not fail to be so.  But the
personality that they reveal has nothing petty or ignoble about it.  The
petulant cry of the shallow egoist which was the chief characteristic of
the _Love Sonnets of Proteus_ is not to be found here.  In its place we
have wild grief and terrible scorn, fierce rage and flame-like passion.
Such a sonnet as the following comes out of the very fire of heart and
brain:

And this sonnet has all the strange strength of that despair which is but
the prelude to a larger hope:

The sonnet beginning

is very fine; and this, written just after entering the gaol, is
powerful:

But, indeed, all the sonnets are worth reading, and _The Canon of
Aughrim_, the longest poem in the book, is a most masterly and dramatic
description of the tragic life of the Irish peasant.  Literature is not
much indebted to Mr. Balfour for his sophistical _Defence of Philosophic
Doubt_, which is one of the dullest books we know, but it must be
admitted that by sending Mr. Blunt to gaol he has converted a clever
rhymer into an earnest and deep-thinking poet.  The narrow confines of a
prison cell seem to suit the ‘sonnet’s scanty plot of ground,’ and an
unjust imprisonment for a noble cause strengthens as well as deepens the
nature.

In these words Walt Whitman gives us the true attitude we
should adopt towards his work, having, indeed, a much saner view of the
value and meaning of that work than either his eloquent admirers or noisy
detractors can boast of possessing.  His last book, _November Boughs_, as
he calls it, published in the winter of the old man’s life, reveals to
us, not indeed a soul’s tragedy, for its last note is one of joy and
hope, and noble and unshaken faith in all that is fine and worthy of such
faith, but certainly the drama of a human soul, and puts on record with a
simplicity that has in it both sweetness and strength the record of his
spiritual development, and of the aim and motive both of the manner and
the matter of his work.  His strange mode of expression is shown in these
pages to have been the result of deliberate and self-conscious choice.
The ‘barbaric yawp’ which he sent over ‘the roofs of the world’ so many
years ago, and which wrung from Mr. Swinburne’s lip such lofty panegyric
in song and such loud clamorous censure in prose, appears here in what
will be to many an entirely new light.  For in his very rejection of art
Walt Whitman is an artist.  He tried to produce a certain effect by
certain means and he succeeded.  There is much method in what many have
termed his madness, too much method, indeed, some may be tempted to
fancy.

In the story of his life, as he tells it to us, we find him at the age of
sixteen beginning a definite and philosophical study of literature:

Edgar Allan Poe’s amusing bit of dogmatism that, for our occasions and
our day, ‘there can be no such thing as a long poem,’ fascinated him.
‘The same thought had been haunting my mind before,’ he said, ‘but Poe’s
argument . . . work’d the sum out, and proved it to me,’ and the English
translation of the Bible seems to have suggested to him the possibility
of a poetic form which, while retaining the spirit of poetry, would still
be free from the trammels of rhyme and of a definite metrical system.
Having thus, to a certain degree, settled upon what one might call the
‘technique’ of Whitmanism, he began to brood upon the nature of that
spirit which was to give life to the strange form.  The central point of
the poetry of the future seemed to him to be necessarily ‘an identical
body and soul, a personality,’ in fact, which personality, he tells us
frankly, ‘after many considerations and ponderings I deliberately settled
should be myself.’  However, for the true creation and revealing of this
personality, at first only dimly felt, a new stimulus was needed.  This
came from the Civil War.  After describing the many dreams and passions
of his boyhood and early manhood, he goes on to say:

Having thus obtained the necessary stimulus for the quickening and
awakening of the personal self, some day to be endowed with universality,
he sought to find new notes of song, and, passing beyond the mere passion
for expression, he aimed at ‘Suggestiveness’ first.

Another ‘impetus-word’ is Comradeship, and other ‘word-signs’ are Good
Cheer, Content and Hope.  Individuality, especially, he sought for:

A new theme also was to be found in the relation of the sexes, conceived
in a natural, simple and healthy form, and he protests against poor Mr.
William Rossetti’s attempt to Bowdlerise and expurgate his song.

But beyond all these notes and moods and motives is the lofty spirit of a
grand and free acceptance of all things that are worthy of existence.  He
desired, he says, ‘to formulate a poem whose every thought or fact should
directly or indirectly be or connive at an implicit belief in the wisdom,
health, mystery, beauty of every process, every concrete object, every
human or other existence, not only consider’d from the point of view of
all, but of each.’  His two final utterances are that ‘really great
poetry is always . . . the result of a national spirit, and not the
privilege of a polish’d and select few’; and that ‘the strongest and
sweetest songs yet remain to be sung.’

Such are the views contained in the opening essay _A Backward Glance O’er
Travel’d Roads_, as he calls it; but there are many other essays in this
fascinating volume, some on poets such as Burns and Lord Tennyson, for
whom Walt Whitman has a profound admiration; some on old actors and
singers, the elder Booth, Forrest, Alboni and Mario being his special
favourites; others on the native Indians, on the Spanish element in
American nationality, on Western slang, on the poetry of the Bible, and
on Abraham Lincoln.  But Walt Whitman is at his best when he is analysing
his own work and making schemes for the poetry of the future.
Literature, to him, has a distinctly social aim.  He seeks to build up
the masses by ‘building up grand individuals.’  And yet literature itself
must be preceded by noble forms of life.  ‘The best literature is always
the result of something far greater than itself—not the hero but the
portrait of the hero.  Before there can be recorded history or poem there
must be the transaction.’  Certainly, in Walt Whitman’s views there is a
largeness of vision, a healthy sanity and a fine ethical purpose.  He is
not to be placed with the professional littérateurs of his country,
Boston novelists, New York poets and the like.  He stands apart, and the
chief value of his work is in its prophecy, not in its performance.  He
has begun a prelude to larger themes.  He is the herald to a new era.  As
a man he is the precursor of a fresh type.  He is a factor in the heroic
and spiritual evolution of the human being.  If Poetry has passed him by,
Philosophy will take note of him.

‘The various collectors of Irish folk-lore,’ says Mr. W. B. Yeats in his
charming little book _Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry_,
‘have, from our point of view, one great merit, and from the point of
view of others, one great fault.’

Into a volume of very moderate dimensions, and of extremely moderate
price, Mr. Yeats has collected together the most characteristic of our
Irish folklore stories, grouping them together according to subject.
First come _The Trooping Fairies_.  The peasants say that these are
‘fallen angels who were not good enough to be saved, nor bad enough to be
lost’; but the Irish antiquarians see in them ‘the gods of pagan
Ireland,’ who, ‘when no longer worshipped and fed with offerings,
dwindled away in the popular imagination, and now are only a few spans
high.’  Their chief occupations are feasting, fighting, making love, and
playing the most beautiful music.  ‘They have only one industrious person
amongst them, the _lepra-caun_—the shoemaker.’  It is his duty to repair
their shoes when they wear them out with dancing.  Mr. Yeats tells us
that ‘near the village of Ballisodare is a little woman who lived amongst
them seven years.  When she came home she had no toes—she had danced them
off.’  On May Eve, every seventh year, they fight for the harvest, for
the best ears of grain belong to them.  An old man informed Mr. Yeats
that he saw them fight once, and that they tore the thatch off a house.
‘Had any one else been near they would merely have seen a great wind
whirling everything into the air as it passed.’  When the wind drives the
leaves and straws before it, ‘that is the fairies, and the peasants take
off their hats and say “God bless them.”’  When they are gay, they sing.
Many of the most beautiful tunes of Ireland ‘are only their music, caught
up by eavesdroppers.’  No prudent peasant would hum _The Pretty Girl
Milking the Cow_ near a fairy rath, ‘for they are jealous, and do not
like to hear their songs on clumsy mortal lips.’  Blake once saw a
fairy’s funeral.  But this, as Mr. Yeats points out, must have been an
English fairy, for the Irish fairies never die; they are immortal.

Then come _The Solitary Fairies_, amongst whom we find the little
_Lepracaun_ mentioned above.  He has grown very rich, as he possesses all
the treasure-crocks buried in war-time.  In the early part of this
century, according to Croker, they used to show in Tipperary a little
shoe forgotten by the fairy shoemaker.  Then there are two rather
disreputable little fairies—the _Cluricaun_, who gets intoxicated in
gentlemen’s cellars, and the Red Man, who plays unkind practical jokes.
‘The _Fear-Gorta_ (Man of Hunger) is an emaciated phantom that goes
through the land in famine time, begging an alms and bringing good luck
to the giver.’  The _Water-sheerie_ is ‘own brother to the English
Jack-o’-Lantern.’  ‘_The Leanhaun Shee_ (fairy mistress) seeks the love
of mortals.  If they refuse, she must be their slave; if they consent,
they are hers, and can only escape by finding another to take their
place.  The fairy lives on their life, and they waste away.  Death is no
escape from her.  She is the Gaelic muse, for she gives inspiration to
those she persecutes.  The Gaelic poets die young, for she is restless,
and will not let them remain long on earth.’  The _Pooka_ is essentially
an animal spirit, and some have considered him the forefather of
Shakespeare’s ‘Puck.’  He lives on solitary mountains, and among old
ruins ‘grown monstrous with much solitude,’ and ‘is of the race of the
nightmare.’  ‘He has many shapes—is now a horse, . . . now a goat, now an
eagle.  Like all spirits, he is only half in the world of form.’  The
_banshee_ does not care much for our democratic levelling tendencies; she
loves only old families, and despises the _parvenu_ or the _nouveau
riche_.  When more than one banshee is present, and they wail and sing in
chorus, it is for the death of some holy or great one.  An omen that
sometimes accompanies the banshee is ‘. . . an immense black coach,
mounted by a coffin, and drawn by headless horses driven by a
_Dullahan_.’  A _Dullahan_ is the most terrible thing in the world.  In
1807 two of the sentries stationed outside St. James’s Park saw one
climbing the railings, and died of fright.  Mr. Yeats suggests that they
are possibly ‘descended from that Irish giant who swam across the Channel
with his head in his teeth.’

Then come the stories of ghosts, of saints and priests, and of giants.
The ghosts live in a state intermediary between this world and the next.
They are held there by some earthly longing or affection, or some duty
unfulfilled, or anger against the living; they are those who are too good
for hell, and too bad for heaven.  Sometimes they ‘take the forms of
insects, especially of butterflies.’  The author of the _Parochial Survey
of Ireland_ ‘heard a woman say to a child who was chasing a butterfly,
“How do you know it is not the soul of your grandfather?”  On November
eve they are abroad, and dance with the fairies.’  As for the saints and
priests, ‘there are no martyrs in the stories.’  That ancient chronicler
Giraldus Cambrensis ‘taunted the Archbishop of Cashel, because no one in
Ireland had received the crown of martyrdom.  “Our people may be
barbarous,” the prelate answered, “but they have never lifted their hands
against God’s saints; but now that a people have come amongst us who know
how to make them (it was just after the English invasion), we shall have
martyrs plentifully.”’  The giants were the old pagan heroes of Ireland,
who grew bigger and bigger, just as the gods grew smaller and smaller.
The fact is they did not wait for offerings; they took them _vi et
armis_.

Some of the prettiest stories are those that cluster round _Tír-na-n-Og_.
This is the Country of the Young, ‘for age and death have not found it;
neither tears nor loud laughter have gone near it.’  ‘One man has gone
there and returned.  The bard, Oisen, who wandered away on a white horse,
moving on the surface of the foam with his fairy Niamh, lived there three
hundred years, and then returned looking for his comrades.  The moment
his foot touched the earth his three hundred years fell on him, and he
was bowed double, and his beard swept the ground.  He described his
sojourn in the Land of Youth to Patrick before he died.’  Since then,
according to Mr. Yeats, ‘many have seen it in many places; some in the
depths of lakes, and have heard rising therefrom a vague sound of bells;
more have seen it far off on the horizon, as they peered out from the
western cliffs.  Not three years ago a fisherman imagined that he saw
it.’

Mr. Yeats has certainly done his work very well.  He has shown great
critical capacity in his selection of the stories, and his little
introductions are charmingly written.  It is delightful to come across a
collection of purely imaginative work, and Mr. Yeats has a very quick
instinct in finding out the best and the most beautiful things in Irish
folklore.

I am also glad to see that he has not confined himself entirely to prose,
but has included Allingham’s lovely poem on _The Fairies_:

All lovers of fairy tales and folklore should get this little book.  _The
Horned Women_, _The Priest’s Soul_, {157} and _Teig O’Kane_, are really
marvellous in their way; and, indeed, there is hardly a single story that
is not worth reading and thinking over.

‘_The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems_ is, I believe, the first
volume of poems that Mr. Yeats has published, and it is certainly full of
promise.  It must be admitted that many of the poems are too fragmentary,
too incomplete.  They read like stray scenes out of unfinished plays,
like things only half remembered, or, at best, but dimly seen.  But the
architectonic power of construction, the power to build up and make
perfect a harmonious whole, is nearly always the latest, as it certainly
is the highest, development of the artistic temperament.  It is somewhat
unfair to expect it in early work.  One quality Mr. Yeats has in a marked
degree, a quality that is not common in the work of our minor poets, and
is therefore all the more welcome to us—I mean the romantic temper.  He
is essentially Celtic, and his verse, at its best, is Celtic also.
Strongly influenced by Keats, he seems to study how to ‘load every rift
with ore,’ yet is more fascinated by the beauty of words than by the
beauty of metrical music.  The spirit that dominates the whole book is
perhaps more valuable than any individual poem or particular passage, but
this from _The Wanderings of Oisin_ is worth quoting.  It describes the
ride to the Island of Forgetfulness:

And this, which deals with the old legend of the city lying under the
waters of a lake, is strange and interesting:

Mr. Yeats has a great deal of invention, and some of the poems in his
book, such as _Mosada_, _Jealousy_, and _The Island of Statues_, are very
finely conceived.  It is impossible to doubt, after reading his present
volume, that he will some day give us work of high import.  Up to this he
has been merely trying the strings of his instrument, running over the
keys.

Books of poetry by young writers are usually promissory notes that are
never met.  Now and then, however, one comes across a volume that is so
far above the average that one can hardly resist the fascinating
temptation of recklessly prophesying a fine future for its author.  Such
a book Mr. Yeats’s _Wanderings of Oisin_ certainly is.  Here we find
nobility of treatment and nobility of subject-matter, delicacy of poetic
instinct and richness of imaginative resource.  Unequal and uneven much
of the work must be admitted to be.  Mr. Yeats does not try to ‘out-baby’
Wordsworth, we are glad to say; but he occasionally succeeds in
‘out-glittering’ Keats, and, here and there, in his book we come across
strange crudities and irritating conceits.  But when he is at his best he
is very good.  If he has not the grand simplicity of epic treatment, he
has at least something of the largeness of vision that belongs to the
epical temper.  He does not rob of their stature the great heroes of
Celtic mythology.  He is very naïve and very primitive and speaks of his
giants with the air of a child.  Here is a characteristic passage from
the account of Oisin’s return from the Island of Forgetfulness:

In one or two places the music is faulty, the construction is sometimes
too involved, and the word ‘populace’ in the last line is rather
infelicitous; but, when all is said, it is impossible not to feel in
these stanzas the presence of the true poetic spirit.

Mr. Morris’s last book is a piece of pure art workmanship from beginning
to end, and the very remoteness of its style from the common language and
ordinary interests of our day gives to the whole story a strange beauty
and an unfamiliar charm.  It is written in blended prose and verse, like
the mediæval ‘cante-fable,’ and tells the tale of the House of the
Wolfings in its struggles against the legionaries of Rome then advancing
into Northern Germany.  It is a kind of Saga, and the language in which
the folk-epic, as we may call it, is set forth recalls the antique
dignity and directness of our English tongue four centuries ago.  From an
artistic point of view it may be described as an attempt to return by a
self-conscious effort to the conditions of an earlier and a fresher age.
Attempts of this kind are not uncommon in the history of art.  From some
such feeling came the Pre-Raphaelite movement of our own day and the
archaistic movement of later Greek sculpture.  When the result is
beautiful the method is justified, and no shrill insistence upon a
supposed necessity for absolute modernity of form can prevail against the
value of work that has the incomparable excellence of style.  Certainly,
Mr. Morris’s work possesses this excellence.  His fine harmonies and rich
cadences create in the reader that spirit by which alone can its own
spirit be interpreted, awake in him something of the temper of romance
and, by taking him out of his own age, place him in a truer and more
vital relation to the great masterpieces of all time.  It is a bad thing
for an age to be always looking in art for its own reflection.  It is
well that, now and then, we are given work that is nobly imaginative in
its method and purely artistic in its aim.  As we read Mr. Morris’s story
with its fine alternations of verse and prose, its decorative and
descriptive beauties, its wonderful handling of romantic and adventurous
themes, we cannot but feel that we are as far removed from the ignoble
fiction as we are from the ignoble facts of our own day.  We breathe a
purer air, and have dreams of a time when life had a kind of poetical
quality of its own, and was simple and stately and complete.

The tragic interest of _The House of the Wolfings_ centres round the
figure of Thiodolf, the great hero of the tribe.  The goddess who loves
him gives him, as he goes to battle against the Romans, a magical hauberk
on which rests this strange fate: that he who wears it shall save his own
life and destroy the life of his land.  Thiodolf, finding out this
secret, brings the hauberk back to the Wood-Sun, as she is called, and
chooses death for himself rather than the ruin of his cause, and so the
story ends.

But Mr. Morris has always preferred romance to tragedy, and set the
development of action above the concentration of passion.  His story is
like some splendid old tapestry crowded with stately images and enriched
with delicate and delightful detail.  The impression it leaves on us is
not of a single central figure dominating the whole, but rather of a
magnificent design to which everything is subordinated, and by which
everything becomes of enduring import.  It is the whole presentation of
the primitive life that really fascinates.  What in other hands would
have been mere archæology is here transformed by quick artistic instinct
and made wonderful for us, and human and full of high interest.  The
ancient world seems to have come to life again for our pleasure.

Of a work so large and so coherent, completed with no less perfection
than it is conceived, it is difficult by mere quotation to give any
adequate idea.  This, however, may serve as an example of its narrative
power.  The passage describes the visit of Thiodolf to the Wood-Sun:

As an example of the beauty of the verse we would take this from the song
of the Wood-Sun.  It at least shows how perfectly the poetry harmonizes
with the prose, and how natural the transition is from the one to the
other:

The last chapter of the book in which we are told of the great feast made
for the dead is so finely written that we cannot refrain from quoting
this passage:

In days of uncouth realism and unimaginative imitation, it is a high
pleasure to welcome work of this kind.  It is a work in which all lovers
of literature cannot fail to delight.

‘In modern life,’ said Matthew Arnold once, ‘you cannot well enter a
monastery; but you can enter the Wordsworth Society.’  I fear that this
will sound to many a somewhat uninviting description of this admirable
and useful body, whose papers and productions have been recently
published by Professor Knight, under the title of _Wordsworthiana_.
‘Plain living and high thinking’ are not popular ideals.  Most people
prefer to live in luxury, and to think with the majority.  However, there
is really nothing in the essays and addresses of the Wordsworth Society
that need cause the public any unnecessary alarm; and it is gratifying to
note that, although the society is still in the first blush of
enthusiasm, it has not yet insisted upon our admiring Wordsworth’s
inferior work.  It praises what is worthy of praise, reverences what
should be reverenced, and explains what does not require explanation.
One paper is quite delightful; it is from the pen of Mr. Rawnsley, and
deals with such reminiscences of Wordsworth as still linger among the
peasantry of Westmoreland.  Mr. Rawnsley grew up, he tells us, in the
immediate vicinity of the present Poet-Laureate’s old home in
Lincolnshire, and had been struck with the swiftness with which,

the memories of the poet of the Somersby Wold had ‘faded from off the
circle of the hills’—had, indeed, been astonished to note how little real
interest was taken in him or his fame, and how seldom his works were met
with in the houses of the rich or poor in the very neighbourhood.
Accordingly, when he came to reside in the Lake Country, he endeavoured
to find out what of Wordsworth’s memory among the men of the Dales still
lingered on—how far he was still a moving presence among them—how far his
works had made their way into the cottages and farmhouses of the valleys.
He also tried to discover how far the race of Westmoreland and Cumberland
farm-folk—the ‘Matthews’ and the ‘Michaels’ of the poet, as described by
him—were real or fancy pictures, or how far the characters of the
Dalesmen had been altered in any remarkable manner by tourist influences
during the thirty-two years that have passed since the Lake poet was laid
to rest.

With regard to the latter point, it will be remembered that Mr. Ruskin,
writing in 1876, said that ‘the Border peasantry, painted with absolute
fidelity by Scott and Wordsworth,’ are, as hitherto, a scarcely injured
race; that in his fields at Coniston he had men who might have fought
with Henry V. at Agincourt without being distinguished from any of his
knights; that he could take his tradesmen’s word for a thousand pounds,
and need never latch his garden gate; and that he did not fear
molestation, in wood or on moor, for his girl guests.  Mr. Rawnsley,
however, found that a certain beauty had vanished which the simple
retirement of old valley days fifty years ago gave to the men among whom
Wordsworth lived.  ‘The strangers,’ he says, ‘with their gifts of gold,
their vulgarity, and their requirements, have much to answer for.’  As
for their impressions of Wordsworth, to understand them one must
understand the vernacular of the Lake District.  ‘What was Mr. Wordsworth
like in personal appearance?’ said Mr. Rawnsley once to an old retainer,
who still lives not far from Rydal Mount.  ‘He was a ugly-faäced man, and
a meän-liver,’ was the answer; but all that was really meant was that he
was a man of marked features, and led a very simple life in matters of
food and raiment.  Another old man, who believed that Wordsworth ‘got
most of his poetry out of Hartley,’ spoke of the poet’s wife as ‘a very
onpleasant woman, very onpleasant indeed.  A close-fisted woman, that’s
what she was.’  This, however, seems to have been merely a tribute to
Mrs. Wordsworth’s admirable housekeeping qualities.

The first person interviewed by Mr. Rawnsley was an old lady who had been
once in service at Rydal Mount, and was, in 1870, a lodging-house keeper
at Grasmere.  She was not a very imaginative person, as may be gathered
from the following anecdote:—Mr. Rawnsley’s sister came in from a late
evening walk, and said, ‘O Mrs. D---, have you seen the wonderful
sunset?’  The good lady turned sharply round and, drawing herself to her
full height, as if mortally offended, answered: ‘No, miss; I’m a tidy
cook, I know, and “they say” a decentish body for a landlady, but I don’t
knaw nothing about sunsets or them sort of things, they’ve never been in
my line.’  Her reminiscence of Wordsworth was as worthy of tradition as
it was explanatory, from her point of view, of the method in which
Wordsworth composed, and was helped in his labours by his enthusiastic
sister.  ‘Well, you know,’ she said, ‘Mr. Wordsworth went humming and
booing about, and she, Miss Dorothy, kept close behint him, and she
picked up the bits as he let ’em fall, and tak’ ’em down, and put ’em
together on paper for him.  And you may be very well sure as how she
didn’t understand nor make sense out of ’em, and I doubt that he didn’t
know much about them either himself, but, howivver, there’s a great many
folk as do, I dare say.’  Of Wordsworth’s habit of talking to himself,
and composing aloud, we hear a great deal.  ‘Was Mr. Wordsworth a
sociable man?’ asked Mr. Rawnsley of a Rydal farmer.  ‘Wudsworth, for a’
he had noa pride nor nowt,’ was the answer, ‘was a man who was quite one
to hissel, ye kna.  He was not a man as folks could crack wi’, nor not a
man as could crack wi’ folks.  But there was another thing as kep’ folk
off, he had a ter’ble girt deep voice, and ye might see his faace agaan
for long enuff.  I’ve knoan folks, village lads and lasses, coming over
by old road above, which runs from Grasmere to Rydal, flayt a’most to
death there by Wishing Gaate to hear the girt voice a groanin’ and
mutterin’ and thunderin’ of a still evening.  And he had a way of
standin’ quite still by the rock there in t’ path under Rydal, and folks
could hear sounds like a wild beast coming from the rocks, and childer
were scared fit to be dead a’most.’

But the corroboration comes in strange guise.  Mr. Rawnsley asked one of
the Dalesmen about Wordsworth’s dress and habits.  This was the reply:
‘Wudsworth wore a Jem Crow, never seed him in a boxer in my life,—a Jem
Crow and an old blue cloak was his rig, and _as for his habits_, _he had
noan_; niver knew him with a pot i’ his hand, or a pipe i’ his mouth.
But he was a greät skater, for a’ that—noan better in these parts—why, he
could cut his own naäme upo’ the ice, could Mr. Wudsworth.’  Skating
seems to have been Wordsworth’s one form of amusement.  He was ‘over
feckless i’ his hands’—could not drive or ride—‘not a bit of fish in
him,’ and ‘nowt of a mountaineer.’  But he could skate.  The rapture of
the time when, as a boy, on Esthwaite’s frozen lake, he had

was continued, Mr. Rawnsley tells us, into manhood’s later day; and Mr.
Rawnsley found many proofs that the skill the poet had gained, when

was of such a kind as to astonish the natives among whom he dwelt.  The
recollection of a fall he once had, when his skate caught on a stone,
still lingers in the district.  A boy had been sent to sweep the snow
from the White Moss Tarn for him.  ‘Did Mr. Wudsworth gie ye owt?’ he was
asked, when he returned from his labour.  ‘Na, but I seed him tumlle,
though!’ was the answer.  ‘He was a ter’ble girt skater, was Wudsworth
now,’ says one of Mr. Rawnsley’s informants; ‘he would put one hand i’
his breast (he wore a frill shirt i’ them days), and t’ other hand i’ his
waistband, same as shepherds does to keep their hands warm, and he would
stand up straight and sway and swing away grandly.’

Of his poetry they did not think much, and whatever was good in it they
ascribed to his wife, his sister, and Hartley Coleridge.  He wrote
poetry, they said, ‘because he couldn’t help it—because it was his
hobby’—for sheer love, and not for money.  They could not understand his
doing work ‘for nowt,’ and held his occupation in somewhat light esteem
because it did not bring in ‘a deal o’ brass to the pocket.’  ‘Did you
ever read his poetry, or see any books about in the farmhouses?’ asked
Mr. Rawnsley.  The answer was curious: ‘Ay, ay, time or two.  But ya’re
weel aware there’s potry and potry.  There’s potry wi’ a li’le bit
pleasant in it, and potry sic as a man can laugh at or the childer
understand, and some as takes a deal of mastery to make out what’s said,
and a deal of Wudsworth’s was this sort, ye kna.  You could tell fra the
man’s faace his potry would niver have no laugh in it.  His potry was
quite different work from li’le Hartley.  Hartley ’ud goa running along
beside o’ the brooks and mak his, and goa in the first oppen door and
write what he had got upo’ paper.  But Wudsworth’s potry was real hard
stuff, and bided a deal of makking, and he’d keep it in his head for long
enough.  Eh, but it’s queer, mon, different ways folks hes of making
potry now. . . .  Not but what Mr. Wudsworth didn’t stand very high, and
was a well-spoken man enough.’  The best criticism on Wordsworth that Mr.
Rawnsley heard was this: ‘He was an open-air man, and a great critic of
trees.’

There are many useful and well-written essays in Professor Knight’s
volume, but Mr. Rawnsley’s is far the most interesting of all.  It gives
us a graphic picture of the poet as he appeared in outward semblance and
manner to those about whom he wrote.

Mr. Swinburne once set his age on fire by a volume of very perfect and
very poisonous poetry.  Then he became revolutionary and pantheistic, and
cried out against those that sit in high places both in heaven and on
earth.  Then he invented Marie Stuart and laid upon us the heavy burden
of _Bothwell_.  Then he retired to the nursery and wrote poems about
children of a somewhat over-subtle character.  He is now extremely
patriotic, and manages to combine with his patriotism a strong affection
for the Tory party.  He has always been a great poet.  But he has his
limitations, the chief of which is, curiously enough, the entire lack of
any sense of limit.  His song is nearly always too loud for his subject.
His magnificent rhetoric, nowhere more magnificent than in the volume
that now lies before us, conceals rather than reveals.  It has been said
of him, and with truth, that he is a master of language, but with still
greater truth it may be said that Language is his master.  Words seem to
dominate him.  Alliteration tyrannizes over him.  Mere sound often
becomes his lord.  He is so eloquent that whatever he touches becomes
unreal.

Let us turn to the poem on the Armada:

Somehow we seem to have heard all this before.  Does it come from the
fact that of all the poets who ever lived Mr. Swinburne is the one who is
the most limited in imagery?  It must be admitted that he is so.  He has
wearied us with his monotony.  ‘Fire’ and the ‘Sea’ are the two words
ever on his lips.  We must confess also that this shrill
singing—marvellous as it is—leaves us out of breath.  Here is a passage
from a poem called _A Word with the Wind_:

Verse of this kind may be justly praised for the sustained strength and
vigour of its metrical scheme.  Its purely technical excellence is
extraordinary.  But is it more than an oratorical _tour de force_?  Does
it really convey much?  Does it charm?  Could we return to it again and
again with renewed pleasure?  We think not.  It seems to us empty.

Of course, we must not look to these poems for any revelation of human
life.  To be at one with the elements seems to be Mr. Swinburne’s aim.
He seeks to speak with the breath of wind and wave.  The roar of the fire
is ever in his ears.  He puts his clarion to the lips of Spring and bids
her blow, and the Earth wakes from her dreams and tells him her secret.
He is the first lyric poet who has tried to make an absolute surrender of
his own personality, and he has succeeded.  We hear the song, but we
never know the singer.  We never even get near to him.  Out of the
thunder and splendour of words he himself says nothing.  We have often
had man’s interpretation of Nature; now we have Nature’s interpretation
of man, and she has curiously little to say.  Force and Freedom form her
vague message.  She deafens us with her clangours.

But Mr. Swinburne is not always riding the whirlwind and calling out of
the depths of the sea.  Romantic ballads in Border dialect have not lost
their fascination for him, and this last volume contains some very
splendid examples of this curious artificial kind of poetry.  The amount
of pleasure one gets out of dialect is a matter entirely of temperament.
To say ‘mither’ instead of ‘mother’ seems to many the acme of romance.
There are others who are not quite so ready to believe in the pathos of
provincialism.  There is, however, no doubt of Mr. Swinburne’s mastery
over the form, whether the form be quite legitimate or not.  _The __Weary
Wedding_ has the concentration and colour of a great drama, and the
quaintness of its style lends it something of the power of a grotesque.
The ballad of _The Witch-Mother_, a mediæval Medea who slays her children
because her lord is faithless, is worth reading on account of its
horrible simplicity.  _The Bride’s Tragedy_, with its strange refrain of

_The Tyneside Widow_ and _A Reiver’s Neck-verse_ are all poems of fine
imaginative power, and some of them are terrible in their fierce
intensity of passion.  There is no danger of English poetry narrowing
itself to a form so limited as the romantic ballad in dialect.  It is of
too vital a growth for that.  So we may welcome Mr. Swinburne’s masterly
experiments with the hope that things which are inimitable will not be
imitated.  The collection is completed by a few poems on children, some
sonnets, a threnody on John William Inchbold, and a lovely lyric entitled
_The Interpreters_.

Certainly, ‘for song’s sake’ we should love Mr. Swinburne’s work, cannot,
indeed, help loving it, so marvellous a music-maker is he.  But what of
the soul?  For the soul we must go elsewhere.

An eminent Oxford theologian once remarked that his only objection to
modern progress was that it progressed forward instead of backward—a view
that so fascinated a certain artistic undergraduate that he promptly
wrote an essay upon some unnoticed analogies between the development of
ideas and the movements of the common sea-crab.  I feel sure the
_Speaker_ will not be suspected even by its most enthusiastic friends of
holding this dangerous heresy of retrogression.  But I must candidly
admit that I have come to the conclusion that the most caustic criticism
of modern life I have met with for some time is that contained in the
writings of the learned Chuang Tzŭ, recently translated into the vulgar
tongue by Mr. Herbert Giles, Her Majesty’s Consul at Tamsui.

The spread of popular education has no doubt made the name of this great
thinker quite familiar to the general public, but, for the sake of the
few and the over-cultured, I feel it my duty to state definitely who he
was, and to give a brief outline of the character of his philosophy.

Chuang Tzŭ, whose name must carefully be pronounced as it is not written,
was born in the fourth century before Christ, by the banks of the Yellow
River, in the Flowery Land; and portraits of the wonderful sage seated on
the flying dragon of contemplation may still be found on the simple
tea-trays and pleasing screens of many of our most respectable suburban
households.  The honest ratepayer and his healthy family have no doubt
often mocked at the dome-like forehead of the philosopher, and laughed
over the strange perspective of the landscape that lies beneath him.  If
they really knew who he was, they would tremble.  Chuang Tzŭ spent his
life in preaching the great creed of Inaction, and in pointing out the
uselessness of all useful things.  ‘Do nothing, and everything will be
done,’ was the doctrine which he inherited from his great master Lao Tzŭ.
To resolve action into thought, and thought into abstraction, was his
wicked transcendental aim.  Like the obscure philosopher of early Greek
speculation, he believed in the identity of contraries; like Plato, he
was an idealist, and had all the idealist’s contempt for utilitarian
systems; he was a mystic like Dionysius, and Scotus Erigena, and Jacob
Böhme, and held, with them and with Philo, that the object of life was to
get rid of self-consciousness, and to become the unconscious vehicle of a
higher illumination.  In fact, Chuang Tzŭ may be said to have summed up
in himself almost every mood of European metaphysical or mystical
thought, from Heraclitus down to Hegel.  There was something in him of
the Quietist also; and in his worship of Nothing he may be said to have
in some measure anticipated those strange dreamers of mediæval days who,
like Tauler and Master Eckhart, adored the _purum nihil_ and the Abyss.
The great middle classes of this country, to whom, as we all know, our
prosperity, if not our civilization, is entirely due, may shrug their
shoulders over all this and ask, with a certain amount of reason, what is
the identity of contraries to them, and why they should get rid of that
self-consciousness which is their chief characteristic.  But Chuang Tzŭ
was something more than a metaphysician and an illuminist.  He sought to
destroy society, as we know it, as the middle classes know it; and the
sad thing is that he combines with the passionate eloquence of a Rousseau
the scientific reasoning of a Herbert Spencer.  There is nothing of the
sentimentalist in him.  He pities the rich more than the poor, if he even
pities at all, and prosperity seems to him as tragic a thing as
suffering.  He has nothing of the modern sympathy with failures, nor does
he propose that the prizes should always be given on moral grounds to
those who come in last in the race.  It is the race itself that he
objects to; and as for active sympathy, which has become the profession
of so many worthy people in our own day, he thinks that trying to make
others good is as silly an occupation as ‘beating a drum in a forest in
order to find a fugitive.’  It is a mere waste of energy.  That is all.
While, as for a thoroughly sympathetic man, he is, in the eyes of Chuang
Tzŭ, simply a man who is always trying to be somebody else, and so misses
the only possible excuse for his own existence.

Yes; incredible as it may seem, this curious thinker looked back with a
sigh of regret to a certain Golden Age when there were no competitive
examinations, no wearisome educational systems, no missionaries, no penny
dinners for the people, no Established Churches, no Humanitarian
Societies, no dull lectures about one’s duty to one’s neighbour, and no
tedious sermons about any subject at all.  In those ideal days, he tells
us, people loved each other without being conscious of charity, or
writing to the newspapers about it.  They were upright, and yet they
never published books upon Altruism.  As every man kept his knowledge to
himself, the world escaped the curse of scepticism; and as every man kept
his virtues to himself, nobody meddled in other people’s business.  They
lived simple and peaceful lives, and were contented with such food and
raiment as they could get.  Neighbouring districts were in sight, and
‘the cocks and dogs of one could be heard in the other,’ yet the people
grew old and died without ever interchanging visits.  There was no
chattering about clever men, and no laudation of good men.  The
intolerable sense of obligation was unknown.  The deeds of humanity left
no trace, and their affairs were not made a burden for prosperity by
foolish historians.

In an evil moment the Philanthropist made his appearance, and brought
with him the mischievous idea of Government.  ‘There is such a thing,’
says Chuang Tzŭ, ‘as leaving mankind alone: there has never been such a
thing as governing mankind.’  All modes of government are wrong.  They
are unscientific, because they seek to alter the natural environment of
man; they are immoral because, by interfering with the individual, they
produce the most aggressive forms of egotism; they are ignorant, because
they try to spread education; they are self-destructive, because they
engender anarchy.  ‘Of old,’ he tells us, ‘the Yellow Emperor first
caused charity and duty to one’s neighbour to interfere with the natural
goodness of the heart of man.  In consequence of this, Yao and Shun wore
the hair off their legs in endeavouring to feed their people.  They
disturbed their internal economy in order to find room for artificial
virtues.  They exhausted their energies in framing laws, and they were
failures.’  Man’s heart, our philosopher goes on to say, may be ‘forced
down or stirred up,’ and in either case the issue is fatal.  Yao made the
people too happy, so they were not satisfied.  Chieh made them too
wretched, so they grew discontented.  Then every one began to argue about
the best way of tinkering up society.  ‘It is quite clear that something
must be done,’ they said to each other, and there was a general rush for
knowledge.  The results were so dreadful that the Government of the day
had to bring in Coercion, and as a consequence of this ‘virtuous men
sought refuge in mountain caves, while rulers of state sat trembling in
ancestral halls.’  Then, when everything was in a state of perfect chaos,
the Social Reformers got up on platforms, and preached salvation from the
ills that they and their system had caused.  The poor Social Reformers!
‘They know not shame, nor what it is to blush,’ is the verdict of Chuang
Tzŭ upon them.

The economic question, also, is discussed by this almond-eyed sage at
great length, and he writes about the curse of capital as eloquently as
Mr. Hyndman.  The accumulation of wealth is to him the origin of evil.
It makes the strong violent, and the weak dishonest.  It creates the
petty thief, and puts him in a bamboo cage.  It creates the big thief,
and sets him on a throne of white jade.  It is the father of competition,
and competition is the waste, as well as the destruction, of energy.  The
order of nature is rest, repetition, and peace.  Weariness and war are
the results of an artificial society based upon capital; and the richer
this society gets, the more thoroughly bankrupt it really is, for it has
neither sufficient rewards for the good nor sufficient punishments for
the wicked.  There is also this to be remembered—that the prizes of the
world degrade a man as much as the world’s punishments.  The age is
rotten with its worship of success.  As for education, true wisdom can
neither be learnt nor taught.  It is a spiritual state, to which he who
lives in harmony with nature attains.  Knowledge is shallow if we compare
it with the extent of the unknown, and only the unknowable is of value.
Society produces rogues, and education makes one rogue cleverer than
another.  That is the only result of School Boards.  Besides, of what
possible philosophic importance can education be, when it serves simply
to make each man differ from his neighbour?  We arrive ultimately at a
chaos of opinions, doubt everything, and fall into the vulgar habit of
arguing; and it is only the intellectually lost who ever argue.  Look at
Hui Tzu.  ‘He was a man of many ideas.  His work would fill five carts.
But his doctrines were paradoxical.’  He said that there were feathers in
an egg, because there were feathers on a chicken; that a dog could be a
sheep, because all names were arbitrary; that there was a moment when a
swift-flying arrow was neither moving nor at rest; that if you took a
stick a foot long, and cut it in half every day, you would never come to
the end of it; and that a bay horse and a dun cow were three, because
taken separately they were two, and taken together they were one, and one
and two made up three.  ‘He was like a man running a race with his own
shadow, and making a noise in order to drown the echo.  He was a clever
gadfly, that was all.  What was the use of him?’

Morality is, of course, a different thing.  It went out of fashion, says
Chuang Tzŭ, when people began to moralize.  Men ceased then to be
spontaneous and to act on intuition.  They became priggish and
artificial, and were so blind as to have a definite purpose in life.
Then came Governments and Philanthropists, those two pests of the age.
The former tried to coerce people into being good, and so destroyed the
natural goodness of man.  The latter were a set of aggressive busybodies
who caused confusion wherever they went.  They were stupid enough to have
principles, and unfortunate enough to act up to them.  They all came to
bad ends, and showed that universal altruism is as bad in its results as
universal egotism.  ‘They tripped people up over charity, and fettered
them with duties to their neighbours.’  They gushed over music, and
fussed over ceremonies.  As a consequence of all this, the world lost its
equilibrium, and has been staggering ever since.

Who, then, according to Chuang Tzŭ, is the perfect man?  And what is his
manner of life?  The perfect man does nothing beyond gazing at the
universe.  He adopts no absolute position.  ‘In motion, he is like water.
At rest, he is like a mirror.  And, like Echo, he answers only when he is
called upon.’  He lets externals take care of themselves.  Nothing
material injures him; nothing spiritual punishes him.  His mental
equilibrium gives him the empire of the world.  He is never the slave of
objective existences.  He knows that, ‘just as the best language is that
which is never spoken, so the best action is that which is never done.’
He is passive, and accepts the laws of life.  He rests in inactivity, and
sees the world become virtuous of itself.  He does not try to ‘bring
about his own good deeds.’  He never wastes himself on effort.  He is not
troubled about moral distinctions.  He knows that things are what they
are, and that their consequences will be what they will be.  His mind is
the ‘speculum of creation,’ and he is ever at peace.

All this is of course excessively dangerous, but we must remember that
Chuang Tzŭ lived more than two thousand years ago, and never had the
opportunity of seeing our unrivalled civilization.  And yet it is
possible that, were he to come back to earth and visit us, he might have
something to say to Mr. Balfour about his coercion and active
misgovernment in Ireland; he might smile at some of our philanthropic
ardours, and shake his head over many of our organized charities; the
School Board might not impress him, nor our race for wealth stir his
admiration; he might wonder at our ideals, and grow sad over what we have
realized.  Perhaps it is well that Chuang Tzŭ cannot return.

Meanwhile, thanks to Mr. Giles and Mr. Quaritch, we have his book to
console us, and certainly it is a most fascinating and delightful volume.
Chuang Tzŭ is one of the Darwinians before Darwin.  He traces man from
the germ, and sees his unity with nature.  As an anthropologist he is
excessively interesting, and he describes our primitive arboreal ancestor
living in trees through his terror of animals stronger than himself, and
knowing only one parent, the mother, with all the accuracy of a lecturer
at the Royal Society.  Like Plato, he adopts the dialogue as his mode of
expression, ‘putting words into other people’s mouths,’ he tells us, ‘in
order to gain breadth of view.’  As a story-teller he is charming.  The
account of the visit of the respectable Confucius to the great Robber Chê
is most vivid and brilliant, and it is impossible not to laugh over the
ultimate discomfiture of the sage, the barrenness of whose moral
platitudes is ruthlessly exposed by the successful brigand.  Even in his
metaphysics, Chuang Tzŭ is intensely humorous.  He personifies his
abstractions, and makes them act plays before us.  The Spirit of the
Clouds, when passing eastward through the expanse of air, happened to
fall in with the Vital Principle.  The latter was slapping his ribs and
hopping about: whereupon the Spirit of the Clouds said, ‘Who are you, old
man, and what are you doing?’  ‘Strolling!’ replied the Vital Principle,
without stopping, for all activities are ceaseless.  ‘I want to _know_
something,’ continued the Spirit of the Clouds.  ‘Ah!’ cried the Vital
Principle, in a tone of disapprobation, and a marvellous conversation
follows, that is not unlike the dialogue between the Sphinx and the
Chimera in Flaubert’s curious drama.  Talking animals, also, have their
place in Chuang Tzŭ’s parables and stories, and through myth and poetry
and fancy his strange philosophy finds musical utterance.

Of course it is sad to be told that it is immoral to be consciously good,
and that doing anything is the worst form of idleness.  Thousands of
excellent and really earnest philanthropists would be absolutely thrown
upon the rates if we adopted the view that nobody should be allowed to
meddle in what does not concern him.  The doctrine of the uselessness of
all useful things would not merely endanger our commercial supremacy as a
nation, but might bring discredit upon many prosperous and serious-minded
members of the shop-keeping classes.  What would become of our popular
preachers, our Exeter Hall orators, our drawing-room evangelists, if we
said to them, in the words of Chuang Tzŭ, ‘Mosquitoes will keep a man
awake all night with their biting, and just in the same way this talk of
charity and duty to one’s neighbour drives us nearly crazy.  Sirs, strive
to keep the world to its own original simplicity, and, as the wind
bloweth where it listeth, so let Virtue establish itself.  Wherefore this
undue energy?’  And what would be the fate of governments and
professional politicians if we came to the conclusion that there is no
such thing as governing mankind at all?  It is clear that Chuang Tzŭ is a
very dangerous writer, and the publication of his book in English, two
thousand years after his death, is obviously premature, and may cause a
great deal of pain to many thoroughly respectable and industrious
persons.  It may be true that the ideal of self-culture and
self-development, which is the aim of his scheme of life, and the basis
of his scheme of philosophy, is an ideal somewhat needed by an age like
ours, in which most people are so anxious to educate their neighbours
that they have actually no time left in which to educate themselves.  But
would it be wise to say so?  It seems to me that if we once admitted the
force of any one of Chuang Tzŭ’s destructive criticisms we should have to
put some check on our national habit of self-glorification; and the only
thing that ever consoles man for the stupid things he does is the praise
he always gives himself for doing them.  There may, however, be a few who
have grown wearied of that strange modern tendency that sets enthusiasm
to do the work of the intellect.  To these, and such as these, Chuang Tzŭ
will be welcome.  But let them only read him.  Let them not talk about
him.  He would be disturbing at dinner-parties, and impossible at
afternoon teas, and his whole life was a protest against platform
speaking.  ‘The perfect man ignores self; the divine man ignores action;
the true sage ignores reputation.’  These are the principles of Chuang
Tzŭ.

When I first had the privilege—and I count it a very high one—of meeting
Mr. Walter Pater, he said to me, smiling, ‘Why do you always write
poetry?  Why do you not write prose?  Prose is so much more difficult.’

It was during my undergraduate days at Oxford; days of lyrical ardour and
of studious sonnet-writing; days when one loved the exquisite intricacy
and musical repetitions of the ballade, and the villanelle with its
linked long-drawn echoes and its curious completeness; days when one
solemnly sought to discover the proper temper in which a triolet should
be written; delightful days, in which, I am glad to say, there was far
more rhyme than reason.

I may frankly confess now that at the time I did not quite comprehend
what Mr. Pater really meant; and it was not till I had carefully studied
his beautiful and suggestive essays on the Renaissance that I fully
realized what a wonderful self-conscious art the art of English
prose-writing really is, or may be made to be.  Carlyle’s stormy
rhetoric, Ruskin’s winged and passionate eloquence, had seemed to me to
spring from enthusiasm rather than from art.  I do not think I knew then
that even prophets correct their proofs.  As for Jacobean prose, I
thought it too exuberant; and Queen Anne prose appeared to me terribly
bald, and irritatingly rational.  But Mr. Pater’s essays became to me
‘the golden book of spirit and sense, the holy writ of beauty.’  They are
still this to me.  It is possible, of course, that I may exaggerate about
them.  I certainly hope that I do; for where there is no exaggeration
there is no love, and where there is no love there is no understanding.
It is only about things that do not interest one, that one can give a
really unbiassed opinion; and this is no doubt the reason why an
unbiassed opinion is always valueless.

But I must not allow this brief notice of Mr. Pater’s new volume to
degenerate into an autobiography.  I remember being told in America that
whenever Margaret Fuller wrote an essay upon Emerson the printers had
always to send out to borrow some additional capital ‘I’s,’ and I feel it
right to accept this transatlantic warning.

_Appreciations_, in the fine Latin sense of the word, is the title given
by Mr. Pater to his book, which is an exquisite collection of exquisite
essays, of delicately wrought works of art—some of them being almost
Greek in their purity of outline and perfection of form, others mediæval
in their strangeness of colour and passionate suggestion, and all of them
absolutely modern, in the true meaning of the term modernity.  For he to
whom the present is the only thing that is present, knows nothing of the
age in which he lives.  To realize the nineteenth century one must
realize every century that has preceded it, and that has contributed to
its making.  To know anything about oneself, one must know all about
others.  There must be no mood with which one cannot sympathize, no dead
mode of life that one cannot make alive.  The legacies of heredity may
make us alter our views of moral responsibility, but they cannot but
intensify our sense of the value of Criticism; for the true critic is he
who bears within himself the dreams and ideas and feelings of myriad
generations, and to whom no form of thought is alien, no emotional
impulse obscure.

Perhaps the most interesting, and certainly the least successful, of the
essays contained in the present volume is that on _Style_.  It is the
most interesting because it is the work of one who speaks with the high
authority that comes from the noble realization of things nobly
conceived.  It is the least successful, because the subject is too
abstract.  A true artist like Mr. Pater is most felicitous when he deals
with the concrete, whose very limitations give him finer freedom, while
they necessitate more intense vision.  And yet what a high ideal is
contained in these few pages!  How good it is for us, in these days of
popular education and facile journalism, to be reminded of the real
scholarship that is essential to the perfect writer, who, ‘being a true
lover of words for their own sake, a minute and constant observer of
their physiognomy,’ will avoid what is mere rhetoric, or ostentatious
ornament, or negligent misuse of terms, or ineffective surplusage, and
will be known by his tact of omission, by his skilful economy of means,
by his selection and self-restraint, and perhaps above all by that
conscious artistic structure which is the expression of mind in style.  I
think I have been wrong in saying that the subject is too abstract.  In
Mr. Pater’s hands it becomes very real to us indeed, and he shows us how,
behind the perfection of a man’s style, must lie the passion of a man’s
soul.

As one passes to the rest of the volume, one finds essays on Wordsworth
and on Coleridge, on Charles Lamb and on Sir Thomas Browne, on some of
Shakespeare’s plays and on the English kings that Shakespeare fashioned,
on Dante Rossetti, and on William Morris.  As that on Wordsworth seems to
be Mr. Pater’s last work, so that on the singer of the _Defence of
Guenevere_ is certainly his earliest, or almost his earliest, and it is
interesting to mark the change that has taken place in his style.  This
change is, perhaps, at first sight not very apparent.  In 1868 we find
Mr. Pater writing with the same exquisite care for words, with the same
studied music, with the same temper, and something of the same mode of
treatment.  But, as he goes on, the architecture of the style becomes
richer and more complex, the epithet more precise and intellectual.
Occasionally one may be inclined to think that there is, here and there,
a sentence which is somewhat long, and possibly, if one may venture to
say so, a little heavy and cumbersome in movement.  But if this be so, it
comes from those side-issues suddenly suggested by the idea in its
progress, and really revealing the idea more perfectly; or from those
felicitous after-thoughts that give a fuller completeness to the central
scheme, and yet convey something of the charm of chance; or from a desire
to suggest the secondary shades of meaning with all their accumulating
effect, and to avoid, it may be, the violence and harshness of too
definite and exclusive an opinion.  For in matters of art, at any rate,
thought is inevitably coloured by emotion, and so is fluid rather than
fixed, and, recognizing its dependence upon the moods and upon the
passion of fine moments, will not accept the rigidity of a scientific
formula or a theological dogma.  The critical pleasure, too, that we
receive from tracing, through what may seem the intricacies of a
sentence, the working of the constructive intelligence, must not be
overlooked.  As soon as we have realized the design, everything appears
clear and simple.  After a time, these long sentences of Mr. Pater’s come
to have the charm of an elaborate piece of music, and the unity of such
music also.

I have suggested that the essay on Wordsworth is probably the most recent
bit of work contained in this volume.  If one might choose between so
much that is good, I should be inclined to say it is the finest also.
The essay on Lamb is curiously suggestive; suggestive, indeed, of a
somewhat more tragic, more sombre figure, than men have been wont to
think of in connection with the author of the _Essays of Elia_.  It is an
interesting aspect under which to regard Lamb, but perhaps he himself
would have had some difficulty in recognizing the portrait given of him.
He had, undoubtedly, great sorrows, or motives for sorrow, but he could
console himself at a moment’s notice for the real tragedies of life by
reading any one of the Elizabethan tragedies, provided it was in a folio
edition.  The essay on Sir Thomas Browne is delightful, and has the
strange, personal, fanciful charm of the author of the _Religio Medici_,
Mr. Pater often catching the colour and accent and tone of whatever
artist, or work of art, he deals with.  That on Coleridge, with its
insistence on the necessity of the cultivation of the relative, as
opposed to the absolute spirit in philosophy and in ethics, and its high
appreciation of the poet’s true position in our literature, is in style
and substance a very blameless work.  Grace of expression and delicate
subtlety of thought and phrase, characterize the essays on Shakespeare.
But the essay on Wordsworth has a spiritual beauty of its own.  It
appeals, not to the ordinary Wordsworthian with his uncritical temper,
and his gross confusion of ethical and æsthetical problems, but rather to
those who desire to separate the gold from the dross, and to reach at the
true Wordsworth through the mass of tedious and prosaic work that bears
his name, and that serves often to conceal him from us.  The presence of
an alien element in Wordsworth’s art is, of course, recognized by Mr.
Pater, but he touches on it merely from the psychological point of view,
pointing out how this quality of higher and lower moods gives the effect
in his poetry ‘of a power not altogether his own, or under his control’;
a power which comes and goes when it wills, ‘so that the old fancy which
made the poet’s art an enthusiasm, a form of divine possession, seems
almost true of him.’  Mr. Pater’s earlier essays had their _purpurei
panni_, so eminently suitable for quotation, such as the famous passage
on _Mona Lisa_, and that other in which Botticelli’s strange conception
of the Virgin is so strangely set forth.  From the present volume it is
difficult to select any one passage in preference to another as specially
characteristic of Mr. Pater’s treatment.  This, however, is worth quoting
at length.  It contains a truth eminently suitable for our age:

Certainly the real secret of Wordsworth has never been better expressed.
After having read and reread Mr. Pater’s essay—for it requires
re-reading—one returns to the poet’s work with a new sense of joy and
wonder, and with something of eager and impassioned expectation.  And
perhaps this might be roughly taken as the test or touchstone of the
finest criticism.

Finally, one cannot help noticing the delicate instinct that has gone to
fashion the brief epilogue that ends this delightful volume.  The
difference between the classical and romantic spirits in art has often,
and with much over-emphasis, been discussed.  But with what a light sure
touch does Mr. Pater write of it!  How subtle and certain are his
distinctions!  If imaginative prose be really the special art of this
century, Mr. Pater must rank amongst our century’s most characteristic
artists.  In certain things he stands almost alone.  The age has produced
wonderful prose styles, turbid with individualism, and violent with
excess of rhetoric.  But in Mr. Pater, as in Cardinal Newman, we find the
union of personality with perfection.  He has no rival in his own sphere,
and he has escaped disciples.  And this, not because he has not been
imitated, but because in art so fine as his there is something that, in
its essence, is inimitable.

Perhaps he will write poetry some day.  If he does we would earnestly
appeal to him to give up calling a cock ‘proud chanticleer.’  Few
synonyms are so depressing.

A young writer can gain more from the study of a literary poet than from
the study of a lyrist.

I have seen many audiences more interesting than the actors, and have
often heard better dialogue in the _foyer_ than I have on the stage.

The Dramatic College might take up the education of spectators as well as
that of players, and teach people that there is a proper moment for the
throwing of flowers as well as a proper method.

Life remains eternally unchanged; it is art which, by presenting it to us
under various forms, enables us to realize its many-sided mysteries, and
to catch the quality of its most fiery-coloured moments.  The
originality, I mean, which we ask from the artist, is originality of
treatment, not of subject.  It is only the unimaginative who ever
invents.  The true artist is known by the use he makes of what he
annexes, and he annexes everything.

If I ventured on a bit of advice, which I feel most reluctant to do, it
would be to the effect that while one should always study the method of a
great artist, one should never imitate his manner.  The manner of an
artist is essentially individual, the method of an artist is absolutely
universal.  The first is personality, which no one should copy; the
second is perfection, which all should aim at.

A critic who posed as an authority on field sports assured me that no one
ever went out hunting when roses were in full bloom.  Personally, that is
exactly the season I would select for the chase, but then I know more
about flowers than I do about foxes, and like them much better.

The nineteenth century may be a prosaic age, but we fear that, if we are
to judge by the general run of novels, it is not an age of prose.

Perhaps in this century we are too altruistic to be really artistic.

I am led to hope that the University will some day have a theatre of its
own, and that proficiency in scene-painting will be regarded as a
necessary qualification for the Slade Professorship.  On the stage,
literature returns to life and archæology becomes art.  A fine theatre is
a temple where all the muses may meet, a second Parnassus.

It would be sad indeed if the many volumes of poems that are every year
published in London found no readers but the authors themselves and the
authors’ relations; and the real philanthropist should recognize it as
part of his duties to buy every new book of verse that appears.

A fifteen-line sonnet is as bad a monstrosity as a sonnet in dialogue.

Antiquarian books, as a rule, are extremely dull reading.  They give us
facts without form, science without style, and learning without life.

The Roman patron, in fact, kept the Roman poet alive, and we fancy that
many of our modern bards rather regret the old system.  Better, surely,
the humiliation of the _sportula_ than the indignity of a bill for
printing!  Better to accept a country-house as a gift than to be in debt
to one’s landlady!  On the whole, the patron was an excellent
institution, if not for poetry at least for the poets; . . . every poet
longs for a Mæcenas.

The two things the Greeks valued most in actors were grace of gesture and
music of voice.  Indeed, to gain these virtues their actors used to
subject themselves to a regular course of gymnastics and a particular
regime of diet, health being to the Greeks not merely a quality of art,
but a condition of its production.

One should not be too severe on English novels: they are the only
relaxation of the intellectually unemployed.

Most modern novels are more remarkable for their crime than for their
culture.

Not that a tramp’s mode of life is at all unsuited to the development of
the poetic faculty.  Far from it!  He, if any one, should possess that
freedom of mood which is so essential to the artist, for he has no taxes
to pay and no relations to worry him.  The man who possesses a permanent
address, and whose name is to be found in the Directory, is necessarily
limited and localized.  Only the tramp has absolute liberty of living.
Was not Homer himself a vagrant, and did not Thespis go about in a
caravan?

In art as in life the law of heredity holds good.  _On est toujours fils
de quelqu’un_.

He has succeeded in studying a fine poet without stealing from him—a very
difficult thing to do.

Morocco is a sort of paradox among countries, for though it lies westward
of Piccadilly, yet it is purely Oriental in character, and though it is
but three hours’ sail from Europe, yet it makes you feel (to use the
forcible expression of an American writer) as if you had been taken up by
the scruff of the neck and set down in the Old Testament.

As children themselves are the perfect flowers of life, so a collection
of the best poems written on children should be the most perfect of all
anthologies.

No English poet has written of children with more love and grace and
delicacy [than Herrick].  His _Ode on the Birth of Our Saviour_, his poem
_To His Saviour_, _A Child_: _A Present by a Child_, his _Graces for
Children_, and his many lovely epitaphs on children are all of them
exquisite works of art, simple, sweet and sincere.

As the cross-benches form a refuge for those who have no minds to make
up, so those who cannot make up their minds always take to Homeric
studies.  Many of our leaders have sulked in their tents with Achilles
after some violent political crisis and, enraged at the fickleness of
fortune, more than one has given up to poetry what was obviously meant
for party.

There are two ways of misunderstanding a poem.  One is to misunderstand
it and the other to praise it for qualities it does not possess.

Most modern calendars mar the sweet simplicity of our lives by reminding
us that each day that passes is the anniversary of some perfectly
uninteresting event.  It is true that such aphorisms as

can hardly be said to belong to the very highest order of poetry, still,
they are preferable, on the whole, to the date of Hannah More’s birth, or
of the burning down of Exeter Change, or of the opening of the Great
Exhibition; and though it would be dangerous to make calendars the basis
of Culture, we should all be much improved if we began each day with a
fine passage of English poetry.

Even the most uninteresting poet cannot survive bad editing.

Prefixed to the Calendar is an introductory note . . . displaying that
intimate acquaintance with Sappho’s lost poems which is the privilege
only of those who are not acquainted with Greek literature.

Mediocre critics are usually safe in their generalities; it is in their
reasons and examples that they come so lamentably to grief.

All premature panegyrics bring their own punishment upon themselves.

No one survives being over-estimated.

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was one of the first true men of letters
America produced, and as such deserves a high place in any history of
American civilization.  To a land out of breath in its greed for gain he
showed the example of a life devoted entirely to the study of literature;
his lectures, though not by any means brilliant, were still productive of
much good; he had a most charming and gracious personality, and he wrote
some pretty poems.  But his poems are not of the kind that call for
intellectual analysis or for elaborate description or, indeed, for any
serious discussion at all.

Though the _Psalm of Life_ be shouted from Maine to California, that
would not make it true poetry.

Longfellow has no imitators, for of echoes themselves there are no echoes
and it is only style that makes a school.

Poe’s marvellous lines _To Helen_, a poem as beautiful as a Greek gem and
as musical as Apollo’s lute.

Good novelists are much rarer than good sons, and none of us would part
readily with Micawber and Mrs. Nickleby.  Still, the fact remains that a
man who was affectionate and loving to his children, generous and
warm-hearted to his friends, and whose books are the very bacchanalia of
benevolence, pilloried his parents to make the groundlings laugh, and
this fact every biographer of Dickens should face and, if possible,
explain.

No age ever borrows the slang of its predecessor.

What we do not know about Shakespeare is a most fascinating subject, and
one that would fill a volume, but what we do know about him is so meagre
and inadequate that when it is collected together the result is rather
depressing.

They show a want of knowledge that must be the result of years of study.

Rossetti’s was a great personality, and personalities such as his do not
easily survive shilling primers.

We are sorry to find an English dramatic critic misquoting Shakespeare,
as we had always been of opinion that this was a privilege reserved
specially for our English actors.

Biographies of this kind rob life of much of its dignity and its wonder,
add to death itself a new terror, and make one wish that all art were
anonymous.

A pillar of fire to the few who knew him, and of cloud to the many who
knew him not, Dante Gabriel Rossetti lived apart from the gossip and
tittle-tattle of a shallow age.  He never trafficked with the merchants
for his soul, nor brought his wares into the market-place for the idle to
gape at.  Passionate and romantic though he was, yet there was in his
nature something of high austerity.  He loved seclusion, and hated
notoriety, and would have shuddered at the idea that within a few years
after his death he was to make his appearance in a series of popular
biographies, sandwiched between the author of _Pickwick_ and the Great
Lexicographer.

We sincerely hope that a few more novels like these will be published, as
the public will then find out that a bad book is very dear at a shilling.

The only form of fiction in which real characters do not seem out of
place is history.  In novels they are detestable.

Shilling literature is always making demands on our credulity without
ever appealing to our imagination.

Pathology is rapidly becoming the basis of sensational literature, and in
art, as in politics, there is a great future for monsters.

It is only mediocrities and old maids who consider it a grievance to be
misunderstood.

As truly religious people are resigned to everything, even to mediocre
poetry, there is no reason at all why Madame Guyon’s verses should not be
popular with a large section of the community.

A simile committing suicide is always a depressing spectacle.

Such novels as _Scamp_ are possibly more easy to write than they are to
read.

We have no doubt that when Bailey wrote to Lord Houghton that
common-sense and gentleness were Keats’s two special characteristics the
worthy Archdeacon meant extremely well, but we prefer the real Keats,
with his passionate wilfulness, his fantastic moods and his fine
inconsistence.  Part of Keats’s charm as a man is his fascinating
incompleteness.

The Apostolic dictum, that women should not be suffered to teach, is no
longer applicable to a society such as ours, with its solidarity of
interests, its recognition of natural rights, and its universal
education, however suitable it may have been to the Greek cities under
Roman rule.  Nothing in the United States struck me more than the fact
that the remarkable intellectual progress of that country is very largely
due to the efforts of American women, who edit many of the most powerful
magazines and newspapers, take part in the discussion of every question
of public interest, and exercise an important influence upon the growth
and tendencies of literature and art.  Indeed, the women of America are
the one class in the community that enjoys that leisure which is so
necessary for culture.  The men are, as a rule, so absorbed in business,
that the task of bringing some element of form into the chaos of daily
life is left almost entirely to the opposite sex, and an eminent
Bostonian once assured me that in the twentieth century the whole culture
of his country would be in petticoats.  By that time, however, it is
probable that the dress of the two sexes will be assimilated, as
similarity of costume always follows similarity of pursuits.

The aim of social comedy, in Menander no less than in Sheridan, is to
mirror the manners, not to reform the morals, of its day, and the censure
of the Puritan, whether real or affected, is always out of place in
literary criticism, and shows a want of recognition of the essential
distinction between art and life.  After all, it is only the Philistine
who thinks of blaming Jack Absolute for his deception, Bob Acres for his
cowardice, and Charles Surface for his extravagance, and there is very
little use in airing one’s moral sense at the expense of one’s artistic
appreciation.

The _Æneid_ bears almost the same relation to the _Iliad_ that the
_Idylls of the King_ do to the old Celtic romances of Arthur.  Like them
it is full of felicitous modernisms, of exquisite literary echoes and of
delicate and delightful pictures; as Lord Tennyson loves England so did
Virgil love Rome; the pageants of history and the purple of empire are
equally dear to both poets; but neither of them has the grand simplicity
or the large humanity of the early singers, and, as a hero, Æneas is no
less a failure than Arthur.

There is always a certain amount of danger in any attempt to cultivate
impossible virtues.

As far as the serious presentation of life is concerned, what we require
is more imaginative treatment, greater freedom from theatric language and
theatric convention.  It may be questioned, also, whether the consistent
reward of virtue and punishment of wickedness be really the healthiest
ideal for an art that claims to mirror nature.

True originality is to be found rather in the use made of a model than in
the rejection of all models and masters.  _Dans l’art comme dans la
nature on est toujours fils de quelqu’un_, and we should not quarrel with
the reed if it whispers to us the music of the lyre.  A little child once
asked me if it was the nightingale who taught the linnets how to sing.

In France they have had one great genius, Balzac, who invented the modern
method of looking at life; and one great artist, Flaubert, who is the
impeccable master of style; and to the influence of these two men we may
trace almost all contemporary French fiction.  But in England we have had
no schools worth speaking of.  The fiery torch lit by the Brontës has not
been passed on to other hands; Dickens has influenced only journalism;
Thackeray’s delightful superficial philosophy, superb narrative power,
and clever social satire have found no echoes; nor has Trollope left any
direct successors behind him—a fact which is not much to be regretted,
however, as, admirable though Trollope undoubtedly is for rainy
afternoons and tedious railway journeys, from the point of view of
literature he is merely the perpetual curate of Pudlington Parva.

George Meredith’s style is chaos illumined by brilliant flashes of
lightning.  As a writer he has mastered everything, except language; as a
novelist he can do everything, except tell a story; as an artist he is
everything, except articulate.  Too strange to be popular, too individual
to have imitators, the author of _Richard Feverel_ stands absolutely
alone.  It is easy to disarm criticism, but he has disarmed the disciple.
He gives us his philosophy through the medium of wit, and is never so
pathetic as when he is humorous.  To turn truth into a paradox is not
difficult, but George Meredith makes all his paradoxes truths, and no
Theseus can thread his labyrinth, no Œdipus solve his secret.

The most perfect and the most poisonous of all modern French poets once
remarked that a man can live for three days without bread, but that no
one can live for three days without poetry.  This, however, can hardly be
said to be a popular view, or one that commends itself to that curiously
uncommon quality which is called common-sense.  I fancy that most people,
if they do not actually prefer a salmis to a sonnet, certainly like their
culture to repose on a basis of good cookery.

A cynical critic once remarked that no great poet is intelligible and no
little poet worth understanding, but that otherwise poetry is an
admirable thing.  This, however, seems to us a somewhat harsh view of the
subject.  Little poets are an extremely interesting study.  The best of
them have often some new beauty to show us, and though the worst of them
may bore yet they rarely brutalize.

It is a curious thing that when minor poets write choruses to a play they
should always consider it necessary to adopt the style and language of a
bad translator.  We fear that Mr. Bohn has much to answer for.

In one sonnet he makes a distinct attempt to be original and the result
is extremely depressing.

is the most dreadful simile we have ever come across even in poetry.  Mr.
Griffiths should beware of originality.  Like beauty, it is a fatal gift.

There is a wide difference between the beautiful Tuscan city and the
sea-city of the Adriatic.  Florence is a city full of memories of the
great figures of the past.  The traveller cannot pass along her streets
without treading in the very traces of Dante, without stepping on soil
made memorable by footprints never to be effaced.  The greatness of the
surroundings, the palaces, churches, and frowning mediæval castles in the
midst of the city, are all thrown into the background by the greatness,
the individuality, the living power and vigour of the men who are their
originators, and at the same time their inspiring soul.  But when we turn
to Venice the effect is very different.  We do not think of the makers of
that marvellous city, but rather of what they made.  The idealized image
of Venice herself meets us everywhere.  The mother is not overshadowed by
the too great glory of any of her sons.  In her records the city is
everything—the republic, the worshipped ideal of a community in which
every man for the common glory seems to have been willing to sink his
own.  We know that Dante stood within the red walls of the arsenal, and
saw the galleys making and mending, and the pitch flaming up to heaven;
Petrarch came to visit the great Mistress of the Sea, taking refuge
there, ‘in this city, true home of the human race,’ from trouble, war and
pestilence outside; and Byron, with his facile enthusiasms and fervent
eloquence, made his home for a time in one of the stately, decaying
palaces; but with these exceptions no great poet has ever associated
himself with the life of Venice.  She had architects, sculptors and
painters, but no singer of her own.

To realize the popularity of the great poets one should turn to the minor
poets and see whom they follow, what master they select, whose music they
echo.

Ordinary theology has long since converted its gold into lead, and words
and phrases that once touched the heart of the world have become
wearisome and meaningless through repetition.  If Theology desires to
move us, she must re-write her formulas.

It takes a great artist to be thoroughly modern.  Nature is always a
little behind the age.

Mr. Nash, who styles himself ‘a humble soldier in the army of Faith,’
expresses a hope that his book may ‘invigorate devotional feeling,
especially among the young, to whom verse is perhaps more attractive than
to their elders,’ but we should be sorry to think that people of any age
could admire such a paraphrase as the following:

It is a curious fact that the worst work is always done with the best
intentions, and that people are never so trivial as when they take
themselves very seriously.

Mr. Foster is an American poet who has read Hawthorne, which is wise of
him, and imitated Longfellow, which is not quite so commendable.

_Andiatoroctè_ is the title of a volume of poems by the Rev. Clarence
Walworth, of Albany, N.Y.  It is a word borrowed from the Indians, and
should, we think, be returned to them as soon as possible.  The most
curious poem of the book is called _Scenes at the Holy Home_:

Poems of this kind were popular in the Middle Ages when the cathedrals of
every Christian country served as its theatres.  They are anachronisms
now, and it is odd that they should come to us from the United States.
In matters of this kind we should have some protection.

As for the triolets, and the rondels, and the careful study of metrical
subtleties, these things are merely the signs of a desire for perfection
in small things and of the recognition of poetry as an art.  They have
had certainly one good result—they have made our minor poets readable,
and have not left us entirely at the mercy of geniuses.

Poetry has many modes of music; she does not blow through one pipe alone.
Directness of utterance is good, but so is the subtle recasting of
thought into a new and delightful form.  Simplicity is good, but
complexity, mystery, strangeness, symbolism, obscurity even, these have
their value.  Indeed, properly speaking, there is no such thing as Style;
there are merely styles, that is all.

Writers of poetical prose are rarely good poets.

Poetry may be said to need far more self-restraint than prose.  Its
conditions are more exquisite.  It produces its effects by more subtle
means.  It must not be allowed to degenerate into mere rhetoric or mere
eloquence.  It is, in one sense, the most self-conscious of all the arts,
as it is never a means to an end but always an end in itself.

It may be difficult for a poet to find English synonyms for Asiatic
expressions, but even if it were impossible it is none the less a poet’s
duty to find them.  As it is, Sir Edwin Arnold has translated Sa’di and
some one must translate Sir Edwin Arnold.

Lounging in the open air is not a bad school for poets, but it largely
depends on the lounger.

People are so fond of giving away what they do not want themselves, that
charity is largely on the increase.  But with this kind of charity I have
not much sympathy.  If one gives away a book, it should be a charming
book—so charming, that one regrets having given it.

Mr. Whistler, for some reason or other, always adopted the phraseology of
the minor prophets.  Possibly it was in order to emphasize his well-known
claims to verbal inspiration, or perhaps he thought with Voltaire that
_Habakkuk était capable de tout_, and wished to shelter himself under the
shield of a definitely irresponsible writer none of whose prophecies,
according to the French philosopher, has ever been fulfilled.  The idea
was clever enough at the beginning, but ultimately the manner became
monotonous.  The spirit of the Hebrews is excellent but their mode of
writing is not to be imitated, and no amount of American jokes will give
it that modernity which is essential to a good literary style.  Admirable
as are Mr. Whistler’s fireworks on canvas, his fireworks in prose are
abrupt, violent and exaggerated.

‘The decisive events of the world,’ as has been well said, ‘take place in
the intellect,’ and as for Board-schools, academic ceremonies, hospital
wards and the like, they may be well left to the artists of the
illustrated papers, who do them admirably and quite as well as they need
be done.  Indeed, the pictures of contemporary events, Royal marriages,
naval reviews and things of this kind that appear in the Academy every
year, are always extremely bad; while the very same subjects treated in
black and white in the _Graphic_ or the _London News_ are excellent.
Besides, if we want to understand the history of a nation through the
medium of art, it is to the imaginative and ideal arts that we have to go
and not to the arts that are definitely imitative.  The visible aspect of
life no longer contains for us the secret of life’s spirit.

The difficulty under which the novelists of our day labour seems to me to
be this: if they do not go into society, their books are unreadable; and
if they do go into society, they have no time left for writing.

I must confess that most modern mysticism seems to me to be simply a
method of imparting useless knowledge in a form that no one can
understand.  Allegory, parable, and vision have their high artistic uses,
but their philosophical and scientific uses are very small.

The object of most modern fiction is not to give pleasure to the artistic
instinct, but rather to portray life vividly for us, to draw attention to
social anomalies, and social forms of injustice.  Many of our novelists
are really pamphleteers, reformers masquerading as story-tellers, earnest
sociologists seeking to mend as well as to mirror life.

The book is certainly characteristic of an age so practical and so
literary as ours, an age in which all social reforms have been preceded
and have been largely influenced by fiction.

Mr. Stopford Brooke said some time ago that Socialism and the socialistic
spirit would give our poets nobler and loftier themes for song, would
widen their sympathies and enlarge the horizon of their vision, and would
touch, with the fire and fervour of a new faith, lips that had else been
silent, hearts that but for this fresh gospel had been cold.  What Art
gains from contemporary events is always a fascinating problem and a
problem that is not easy to solve.  It is, however, certain that
Socialism starts well equipped.  She has her poets and her painters, her
art lecturers and her cunning designers, her powerful orators and her
clever writers.  If she fails it will not be for lack of expression.  If
she succeeds her triumph will not be a triumph of mere brute force.

Socialism is not going to allow herself to be trammelled by any hard and
fast creed or to be stereotyped into an iron formula.  She welcomes many
and multiform natures.  She rejects none and has room for all.  She has
the attraction of a wonderful personality and touches the heart of one
and the brain of another, and draws this man by his hatred and injustice,
and his neighbour by his faith in the future, and a third, it may be, by
his love of art or by his wild worship of a lost and buried past.  And
all of this is well.  For, to make men Socialists is nothing, but to make
Socialism human is a great thing.

The Reformation gained much from the use of popular hymn-tunes, and the
Socialists seem determined to gain by similar means a similar hold upon
the people.  However, they must not be too sanguine about the result.
The walls of Thebes rose up to the sound of music, and Thebes was a very
dull city indeed.

We really must protest against Mr. Matthews’ efforts to confuse the
poetry of Piccadilly with the poetry of Parnassus.  To tell us, for
instance, that Mr. Austin Dobson’s verse ‘has not the condensed clearness
nor the incisive vigor of Mr. Locker’s’ is really too bad even for
Transatlantic criticism.  Nobody who lays claim to the slightest
knowledge of literature and the forms of literature should ever bring the
two names into conjunction.

Mr. Dobson has produced work that is absolutely classical in its
exquisite beauty of form.  Nothing more artistically perfect in its way
than the _Lines to a Greek Girl_ has been written in our time.  This
little poem will be remembered in literature as long as _Thyrsis_ is
remembered, and _Thyrsis_ will never be forgotten.  Both have that note
of distinction that is so rare in these days of violence, exaggeration
and rhetoric.  Of course, to suggest, as Mr. Matthews does, that Mr.
Dobson’s poems belong to ‘the literature of power’ is ridiculous.  Power
is not their aim, nor is it their effect.  They have other qualities, and
in their own delicately limited sphere they have no contemporary rivals;
they have none even second to them.

The heroine is a sort of well-worn Becky Sharp, only much more beautiful
than Becky, or at least than Thackeray’s portraits of her, which,
however, have always seemed to me rather ill-natured.  I feel sure that
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley was extremely pretty, and I have never understood how
it was that Thackeray could caricature with his pencil so fascinating a
creation of his pen.

A critic recently remarked of Adam Lindsay Gordon that through him
Australia had found her first fine utterance in song.  This, however, is
an amiable error.  There is very little of Australia in Gordon’s poetry.
His heart and mind and fancy were always preoccupied with memories and
dreams of England and such culture as England gave him.  He owed nothing
to the land of his adoption.  Had he stayed at home he would have done
much better work.

That Australia, however, will some day make amends by producing a poet of
her own we cannot doubt, and for him there will be new notes to sound and
new wonders to tell of.

The best that we can say of him is that he wrote imperfectly in Australia
those poems that in England he might have made perfect.

Judges, like the criminal classes, have their lighter moments.

There seems to be some curious connection between piety and poor rhymes.

The South African poets, as a class, are rather behind the age.  They
seem to think that ‘Aurora’ is a very novel and delightful epithet for
the dawn.  On the whole they depress us.

The only original thing in the volume is the description of Mr. Robert
Buchanan’s ‘grandeur of mind.’  This is decidedly new.

Dr. Cockle tells us that Müllner’s _Guilt_ and _The Ancestress_ of
Grillparzer are the masterpieces of German fate-tragedy.  His translation
of the first of these two masterpieces does not make us long for any
further acquaintance with the school.  Here is a specimen from the fourth
act of the fate-tragedy.

The Renaissance had for its object the development of great
personalities.  The perfect freedom of the temperament in matters of art,
the perfect freedom of the intellect in intellectual matters, the full
development of the individual, were the things it aimed at.  As we study
its history we find it full of great anarchies.  It solved no political
or social problems; it did not seek to solve them.  The ideal of the
‘Grand Siècle,’ and of Richelieu, in whom the forces of that great age
were incarnate, was different.  The ideas of citizenship, of the building
up of a great nation, of the centralization of forces, of collective
action, of ethnic unity of purpose, came before the world.

The creation of a formal tradition upon classical lines is never without
its danger, and it is sad to find the provincial towns of France, once so
varied and individual in artistic expression, writing to Paris for
designs and advice.  And yet, through Colbert’s great centralizing scheme
of State supervision and State aid, France was the one country in Europe,
and has remained the one country in Europe, where the arts are not
divorced from industry.

Hawthorne re-created for us the America of the past with the incomparable
grace of a very perfect artist, but Mr. Bret Harte’s emphasized modernity
has, in its own sphere, won equal, or almost equal, triumphs.

It is pleasant to come across a heroine [Bret Harte’s _Cressy_] who is
not identified with any great cause, and represents no important
principle, but is simply a wonderful nymph from American backwoods, who
has in her something of Artemis, and not a little of Aphrodite.

It is always a pleasure to come across an American poet who is not
national, and who tries to give expression to the literature that he
loves rather than to the land in which he lives.  The Muses care so
little for geography!

Blue-books are generally dull reading, but Blue-books on Ireland have
always been interesting.  They form the record of one of the great
tragedies of modern Europe.  In them England has written down her
indictment against herself and has given to the world the history of her
shame.  If in the last century she tried to govern Ireland with an
insolence that was intensified by race hatred and religious prejudice,
she has sought to rule her in this century with a stupidity that is
aggravated by good intentions.

Like most penmen he [Froude] overrates the power of the sword.  Where
England has had to struggle she has been wise.  Where physical strength
has been on her side, as in Ireland, she has been made unwieldy by that
strength.  Her own strong hands have blinded her.  She has had force but
no direction.

There are some who will welcome with delight the idea of solving the
Irish question by doing away with the Irish people.  There are others who
will remember that Ireland has extended her boundaries, and that we have
now to reckon with her not merely in the Old World but in the New.

Plastic simplicity of outline may render for us the visible aspect of
life; it is different when we come to deal with those secrets which
self-consciousness alone contains, and which self-consciousness itself
can but half reveal.  Action takes place in the sunlight, but the soul
works in the dark.  There is something curiously interesting in the
marked tendency of modern poetry to become obscure.  Many critics,
writing with their eyes fixed on the masterpieces of past literature,
have ascribed this tendency to wilfulness and to affectation.  Its origin
is rather to be found in the complexity of the new problems, and in the
fact that self-consciousness is not yet adequate to explain the contents
of the Ego.  In Mr. Browning’s poems, as in life itself, which has
suggested, or rather necessitated, the new method, thought seems to
proceed not on logical lines, but on lines of passion.  The unity of the
individual is being expressed through its inconsistencies and its
contradictions.  In a strange twilight man is seeking for himself, and
when he has found his own image, he cannot understand it.  Objective
forms of art, such as sculpture and the drama, sufficed one for the
perfect presentation of life; they can no longer so suffice.

As he is not a genius he, naturally, behaves admirably on every occasion.

Certainly dialect is dramatic.  It is a vivid method of re-creating a
past that never existed.  It is something between ‘A Return to Nature’
and ‘A Return to the Glossary.’  It is so artificial that it is really
naïve.  From the point of view of mere music, much may be said for it.
Wonderful diminutives lend new notes of tenderness to the song.  There
are possibilities of fresh rhymes, and in search for a fresh rhyme poets
may be excused if they wander from the broad highroad of classical
utterance into devious byways and less-trodden paths.  Sometimes one is
tempted to look on dialect as expressing simply the pathos of
provincialisms, but there is more in it than mere mispronunciation.  With
that revival of an antique form, often comes the revival of an antique
spirit.  Through limitations that are sometimes uncouth, and always
narrow, comes Tragedy herself; and though she may stammer in her
utterance, and deck herself in cast-off weeds and trammelling raiment,
still we must hold ourselves in readiness to accept her, so rare are her
visits to us now, so rare her presence in an age that demands a happy
ending from every play, and that sees in the theatre merely a source of
amusement.

There is a great deal to be said in favour of reading a novel backwards.
The last page is, as a rule, the most interesting, and when one begins
with the catastrophe or the _dénoûment_ one feels on pleasant terms of
equality with the author.  It is like going behind the scenes of a
theatre.  One is no longer taken in, and the hairbreadth escapes of the
hero and the wild agonies of the heroine leave one absolutely unmoved.

He has every form of sincerity except the sincerity of the artist, a
defect that he shares with most of our popular writers.

On the whole _Primavera_ is a pleasant little book, and we are glad to
welcome it.  It is charmingly ‘got up,’ and undergraduates might read it
with advantage during lecture hours.

 

The artist is the creator of beautiful things.  To reveal art and
conceal the artist is art's aim.  The critic is he who can translate
into another manner or a new material his impression of beautiful
things.

The highest as the lowest form of criticism is a mode of autobiography.
Those who find ugly meanings in beautiful things are corrupt without
being charming.  This is a fault.

Those who find beautiful meanings in beautiful things are the
cultivated.  For these there is hope.  They are the elect to whom
beautiful things mean only beauty.

There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book.  Books are well
written, or badly written.  That is all.

The nineteenth century dislike of realism is the rage of Caliban seeing
his own face in a glass.

The nineteenth century dislike of romanticism is the rage of Caliban
not seeing his own face in a glass.  The moral life of man forms part
of the subject-matter of the artist, but the morality of art consists
in the perfect use of an imperfect medium.  No artist desires to prove
anything.  Even things that are true can be proved.  No artist has
ethical sympathies.  An ethical sympathy in an artist is an
unpardonable mannerism of style.  No artist is ever morbid.  The artist
can express everything.  Thought and language are to the artist
instruments of an art.  Vice and virtue are to the artist materials for
an art.  From the point of view of form, the type of all the arts is
the art of the musician.  From the point of view of feeling, the
actor's craft is the type.  All art is at once surface and symbol.
Those who go beneath the surface do so at their peril.  Those who read
the symbol do so at their peril.  It is the spectator, and not life,
that art really mirrors.  Diversity of opinion about a work of art
shows that the work is new, complex, and vital.  When critics disagree,
the artist is in accord with himself.  We can forgive a man for making
a useful thing as long as he does not admire it.  The only excuse for
making a useless thing is that one admires it intensely.

               All art is quite useless.

The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses, and when the light
summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden, there came through
the open door the heavy scent of the lilac, or the more delicate
perfume of the pink-flowering thorn.

From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was
lying, smoking, as was his custom, innumerable cigarettes, Lord Henry
Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured
blossoms of a laburnum, whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to
bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs; and now and then
the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long
tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window,
producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect, and making him think of
those pallid, jade-faced painters of Tokyo who, through the medium of
an art that is necessarily immobile, seek to convey the sense of
swiftness and motion.  The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their
way through the long unmown grass, or circling with monotonous
insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine,
seemed to make the stillness more oppressive.  The dim roar of London
was like the bourdon note of a distant organ.

In the centre of the room, clamped to an upright easel, stood the
full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty,
and in front of it, some little distance away, was sitting the artist
himself, Basil Hallward, whose sudden disappearance some years ago
caused, at the time, such public excitement and gave rise to so many
strange conjectures.

As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so
skilfully mirrored in his art, a smile of pleasure passed across his
face, and seemed about to linger there.  But he suddenly started up,
and closing his eyes, placed his fingers upon the lids, as though he
sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he
feared he might awake.

"It is your best work, Basil, the best thing you have ever done," said
Lord Henry languidly.  "You must certainly send it next year to the
Grosvenor.  The Academy is too large and too vulgar.  Whenever I have
gone there, there have been either so many people that I have not been
able to see the pictures, which was dreadful, or so many pictures that
I have not been able to see the people, which was worse.  The Grosvenor
is really the only place."

"I don't think I shall send it anywhere," he answered, tossing his head
back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at
Oxford.  "No, I won't send it anywhere."

Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through
the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls
from his heavy, opium-tainted cigarette.  "Not send it anywhere?  My
dear fellow, why?  Have you any reason?  What odd chaps you painters
are!  You do anything in the world to gain a reputation.  As soon as
you have one, you seem to want to throw it away.  It is silly of you,
for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about,
and that is not being talked about.  A portrait like this would set you
far above all the young men in England, and make the old men quite
jealous, if old men are ever capable of any emotion."

"I know you will laugh at me," he replied, "but I really can't exhibit
it.  I have put too much of myself into it."

Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed.

"Yes, I knew you would; but it is quite true, all the same."

"Too much of yourself in it! Upon my word, Basil, I didn't know you
were so vain; and I really can't see any resemblance between you, with
your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair, and this young
Adonis, who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves. Why,
my dear Basil, he is a Narcissus, and you--well, of course you have an
intellectual expression and all that.  But beauty, real beauty, ends
where an intellectual expression begins.  Intellect is in itself a mode
of exaggeration, and destroys the harmony of any face.  The moment one
sits down to think, one becomes all nose, or all forehead, or something
horrid.  Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions.
How perfectly hideous they are!  Except, of course, in the Church.  But
then in the Church they don't think.  A bishop keeps on saying at the
age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen,
and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful.
Your mysterious young friend, whose name you have never told me, but
whose picture really fascinates me, never thinks.  I feel quite sure of
that.  He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always
here in winter when we have no flowers to look at, and always here in
summer when we want something to chill our intelligence.  Don't flatter
yourself, Basil:  you are not in the least like him."

"You don't understand me, Harry," answered the artist.  "Of course I am
not like him.  I know that perfectly well.  Indeed, I should be sorry
to look like him.  You shrug your shoulders?  I am telling you the
truth.  There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual
distinction, the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the
faltering steps of kings.  It is better not to be different from one's
fellows.  The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world.
They can sit at their ease and gape at the play.  If they know nothing
of victory, they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat.  They
live as we all should live--undisturbed, indifferent, and without
disquiet.  They neither bring ruin upon others, nor ever receive it
from alien hands.  Your rank and wealth, Harry; my brains, such as they
are--my art, whatever it may be worth; Dorian Gray's good looks--we
shall all suffer for what the gods have given us, suffer terribly."

"Dorian Gray?  Is that his name?" asked Lord Henry, walking across the
studio towards Basil Hallward.

"Yes, that is his name.  I didn't intend to tell it to you."

"But why not?"

"Oh, I can't explain.  When I like people immensely, I never tell their
names to any one.  It is like surrendering a part of them.  I have
grown to love secrecy.  It seems to be the one thing that can make
modern life mysterious or marvellous to us.  The commonest thing is
delightful if one only hides it.  When I leave town now I never tell my
people where I am going.  If I did, I would lose all my pleasure.  It
is a silly habit, I dare say, but somehow it seems to bring a great
deal of romance into one's life.  I suppose you think me awfully
foolish about it?"

"Not at all," answered Lord Henry, "not at all, my dear Basil.  You
seem to forget that I am married, and the one charm of marriage is that
it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties.  I
never know where my wife is, and my wife never knows what I am doing.
When we meet--we do meet occasionally, when we dine out together, or go
down to the Duke's--we tell each other the most absurd stories with the
most serious faces.  My wife is very good at it--much better, in fact,
than I am.  She never gets confused over her dates, and I always do.
But when she does find me out, she makes no row at all.  I sometimes
wish she would; but she merely laughs at me."

"I hate the way you talk about your married life, Harry," said Basil
Hallward, strolling towards the door that led into the garden.  "I
believe that you are really a very good husband, but that you are
thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues.  You are an extraordinary
fellow.  You never say a moral thing, and you never do a wrong thing.
Your cynicism is simply a pose."

"Being natural is simply a pose, and the most irritating pose I know,"
cried Lord Henry, laughing; and the two young men went out into the
garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that
stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush.  The sunlight slipped over
the polished leaves.  In the grass, white daisies were tremulous.

After a pause, Lord Henry pulled out his watch.  "I am afraid I must be
going, Basil," he murmured, "and before I go, I insist on your
answering a question I put to you some time ago."

"What is that?" said the painter, keeping his eyes fixed on the ground.

"You know quite well."

"I do not, Harry."

"Well, I will tell you what it is.  I want you to explain to me why you
won't exhibit Dorian Gray's picture.  I want the real reason."

"I told you the real reason."

"No, you did not.  You said it was because there was too much of
yourself in it.  Now, that is childish."

"Harry," said Basil Hallward, looking him straight in the face, "every
portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist, not
of the sitter.  The sitter is merely the accident, the occasion.  It is
not he who is revealed by the painter; it is rather the painter who, on
the coloured canvas, reveals himself.  The reason I will not exhibit
this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of
my own soul."

Lord Henry laughed.  "And what is that?" he asked.

"I will tell you," said Hallward; but an expression of perplexity came
over his face.

"I am all expectation, Basil," continued his companion, glancing at him.

"Oh, there is really very little to tell, Harry," answered the painter;
"and I am afraid you will hardly understand it.  Perhaps you will
hardly believe it."

Lord Henry smiled, and leaning down, plucked a pink-petalled daisy from
the grass and examined it.  "I am quite sure I shall understand it," he
replied, gazing intently at the little golden, white-feathered disk,
"and as for believing things, I can believe anything, provided that it
is quite incredible."

The wind shook some blossoms from the trees, and the heavy
lilac-blooms, with their clustering stars, moved to and fro in the
languid air.  A grasshopper began to chirrup by the wall, and like a
blue thread a long thin dragon-fly floated past on its brown gauze
wings.  Lord Henry felt as if he could hear Basil Hallward's heart
beating, and wondered what was coming.

"The story is simply this," said the painter after some time.  "Two
months ago I went to a crush at Lady Brandon's. You know we poor
artists have to show ourselves in society from time to time, just to
remind the public that we are not savages.  With an evening coat and a
white tie, as you told me once, anybody, even a stock-broker, can gain
a reputation for being civilized.  Well, after I had been in the room
about ten minutes, talking to huge overdressed dowagers and tedious
academicians, I suddenly became conscious that some one was looking at
me.  I turned half-way round and saw Dorian Gray for the first time.
When our eyes met, I felt that I was growing pale.  A curious sensation
of terror came over me.  I knew that I had come face to face with some
one whose mere personality was so fascinating that, if I allowed it to
do so, it would absorb my whole nature, my whole soul, my very art
itself.  I did not want any external influence in my life.  You know
yourself, Harry, how independent I am by nature.  I have always been my
own master; had at least always been so, till I met Dorian Gray.
Then--but I don't know how to explain it to you.  Something seemed to
tell me that I was on the verge of a terrible crisis in my life.  I had
a strange feeling that fate had in store for me exquisite joys and
exquisite sorrows.  I grew afraid and turned to quit the room.  It was
not conscience that made me do so:  it was a sort of cowardice.  I take
no credit to myself for trying to escape."

"Conscience and cowardice are really the same things, Basil.
Conscience is the trade-name of the firm.  That is all."

"I don't believe that, Harry, and I don't believe you do either.
However, whatever was my motive--and it may have been pride, for I used
to be very proud--I certainly struggled to the door.  There, of course,
I stumbled against Lady Brandon.  'You are not going to run away so
soon, Mr. Hallward?' she screamed out.  You know her curiously shrill
voice?"

"Yes; she is a peacock in everything but beauty," said Lord Henry,
pulling the daisy to bits with his long nervous fingers.

"I could not get rid of her.  She brought me up to royalties, and
people with stars and garters, and elderly ladies with gigantic tiaras
and parrot noses.  She spoke of me as her dearest friend.  I had only
met her once before, but she took it into her head to lionize me.  I
believe some picture of mine had made a great success at the time, at
least had been chattered about in the penny newspapers, which is the
nineteenth-century standard of immortality.  Suddenly I found myself
face to face with the young man whose personality had so strangely
stirred me.  We were quite close, almost touching.  Our eyes met again.
It was reckless of me, but I asked Lady Brandon to introduce me to him.
Perhaps it was not so reckless, after all.  It was simply inevitable.
We would have spoken to each other without any introduction.  I am sure
of that.  Dorian told me so afterwards.  He, too, felt that we were
destined to know each other."

"And how did Lady Brandon describe this wonderful young man?" asked his
companion.  "I know she goes in for giving a rapid _precis_ of all her
guests.  I remember her bringing me up to a truculent and red-faced old
gentleman covered all over with orders and ribbons, and hissing into my
ear, in a tragic whisper which must have been perfectly audible to
everybody in the room, the most astounding details.  I simply fled.  I
like to find out people for myself.  But Lady Brandon treats her guests
exactly as an auctioneer treats his goods.  She either explains them
entirely away, or tells one everything about them except what one wants
to know."

"Poor Lady Brandon!  You are hard on her, Harry!" said Hallward
listlessly.

"My dear fellow, she tried to found a _salon_, and only succeeded in
opening a restaurant.  How could I admire her?  But tell me, what did
she say about Mr. Dorian Gray?"

"Oh, something like, 'Charming boy--poor dear mother and I absolutely
inseparable.  Quite forget what he does--afraid he--doesn't do
anything--oh, yes, plays the piano--or is it the violin, dear Mr.
Gray?'  Neither of us could help laughing, and we became friends at
once."

"Laughter is not at all a bad beginning for a friendship, and it is far
the best ending for one," said the young lord, plucking another daisy.

Hallward shook his head.  "You don't understand what friendship is,
Harry," he murmured--"or what enmity is, for that matter.  You like
every one; that is to say, you are indifferent to every one."

"How horribly unjust of you!" cried Lord Henry, tilting his hat back
and looking up at the little clouds that, like ravelled skeins of
glossy white silk, were drifting across the hollowed turquoise of the
summer sky.  "Yes; horribly unjust of you.  I make a great difference
between people.  I choose my friends for their good looks, my
acquaintances for their good characters, and my enemies for their good
intellects.  A man cannot be too careful in the choice of his enemies.
I have not got one who is a fool.  They are all men of some
intellectual power, and consequently they all appreciate me.  Is that
very vain of me?  I think it is rather vain."

"I should think it was, Harry.  But according to your category I must
be merely an acquaintance."

"My dear old Basil, you are much more than an acquaintance."

"And much less than a friend.  A sort of brother, I suppose?"

"Oh, brothers!  I don't care for brothers.  My elder brother won't die,
and my younger brothers seem never to do anything else."

"Harry!" exclaimed Hallward, frowning.

"My dear fellow, I am not quite serious.  But I can't help detesting my
relations.  I suppose it comes from the fact that none of us can stand
other people having the same faults as ourselves.  I quite sympathize
with the rage of the English democracy against what they call the vices
of the upper orders.  The masses feel that drunkenness, stupidity, and
immorality should be their own special property, and that if any one of
us makes an ass of himself, he is poaching on their preserves.  When
poor Southwark got into the divorce court, their indignation was quite
magnificent.  And yet I don't suppose that ten per cent of the
proletariat live correctly."

"I don't agree with a single word that you have said, and, what is
more, Harry, I feel sure you don't either."

Lord Henry stroked his pointed brown beard and tapped the toe of his
patent-leather boot with a tasselled ebony cane.  "How English you are
Basil!  That is the second time you have made that observation.  If one
puts forward an idea to a true Englishman--always a rash thing to
do--he never dreams of considering whether the idea is right or wrong.
The only thing he considers of any importance is whether one believes
it oneself.  Now, the value of an idea has nothing whatsoever to do
with the sincerity of the man who expresses it.  Indeed, the
probabilities are that the more insincere the man is, the more purely
intellectual will the idea be, as in that case it will not be coloured
by either his wants, his desires, or his prejudices.  However, I don't
propose to discuss politics, sociology, or metaphysics with you.  I
like persons better than principles, and I like persons with no
principles better than anything else in the world.  Tell me more about
Mr. Dorian Gray.  How often do you see him?"

"Every day.  I couldn't be happy if I didn't see him every day.  He is
absolutely necessary to me."

"How extraordinary!  I thought you would never care for anything but
your art."

"He is all my art to me now," said the painter gravely.  "I sometimes
think, Harry, that there are only two eras of any importance in the
world's history.  The first is the appearance of a new medium for art,
and the second is the appearance of a new personality for art also.
What the invention of oil-painting was to the Venetians, the face of
Antinous was to late Greek sculpture, and the face of Dorian Gray will
some day be to me.  It is not merely that I paint from him, draw from
him, sketch from him.  Of course, I have done all that.  But he is much
more to me than a model or a sitter.  I won't tell you that I am
dissatisfied with what I have done of him, or that his beauty is such
that art cannot express it.  There is nothing that art cannot express,
and I know that the work I have done, since I met Dorian Gray, is good
work, is the best work of my life.  But in some curious way--I wonder
will you understand me?--his personality has suggested to me an
entirely new manner in art, an entirely new mode of style.  I see
things differently, I think of them differently.  I can now recreate
life in a way that was hidden from me before.  'A dream of form in days
of thought'--who is it who says that?  I forget; but it is what Dorian
Gray has been to me.  The merely visible presence of this lad--for he
seems to me little more than a lad, though he is really over
twenty--his merely visible presence--ah!  I wonder can you realize all
that that means?  Unconsciously he defines for me the lines of a fresh
school, a school that is to have in it all the passion of the romantic
spirit, all the perfection of the spirit that is Greek.  The harmony of
soul and body--how much that is!  We in our madness have separated the
two, and have invented a realism that is vulgar, an ideality that is
void.  Harry! if you only knew what Dorian Gray is to me!  You remember
that landscape of mine, for which Agnew offered me such a huge price
but which I would not part with?  It is one of the best things I have
ever done.  And why is it so?  Because, while I was painting it, Dorian
Gray sat beside me.  Some subtle influence passed from him to me, and
for the first time in my life I saw in the plain woodland the wonder I
had always looked for and always missed."

"Basil, this is extraordinary!  I must see Dorian Gray."

Hallward got up from the seat and walked up and down the garden.  After
some time he came back.  "Harry," he said, "Dorian Gray is to me simply
a motive in art.  You might see nothing in him.  I see everything in
him.  He is never more present in my work than when no image of him is
there.  He is a suggestion, as I have said, of a new manner.  I find
him in the curves of certain lines, in the loveliness and subtleties of
certain colours.  That is all."

"Then why won't you exhibit his portrait?" asked Lord Henry.

"Because, without intending it, I have put into it some expression of
all this curious artistic idolatry, of which, of course, I have never
cared to speak to him.  He knows nothing about it.  He shall never know
anything about it.  But the world might guess it, and I will not bare
my soul to their shallow prying eyes.  My heart shall never be put
under their microscope.  There is too much of myself in the thing,
Harry--too much of myself!"

"Poets are not so scrupulous as you are.  They know how useful passion
is for publication.  Nowadays a broken heart will run to many editions."

"I hate them for it," cried Hallward.  "An artist should create
beautiful things, but should put nothing of his own life into them.  We
live in an age when men treat art as if it were meant to be a form of
autobiography.  We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.  Some day I
will show the world what it is; and for that reason the world shall
never see my portrait of Dorian Gray."

"I think you are wrong, Basil, but I won't argue with you.  It is only
the intellectually lost who ever argue.  Tell me, is Dorian Gray very
fond of you?"

The painter considered for a few moments.  "He likes me," he answered
after a pause; "I know he likes me.  Of course I flatter him
dreadfully.  I find a strange pleasure in saying things to him that I
know I shall be sorry for having said.  As a rule, he is charming to
me, and we sit in the studio and talk of a thousand things.  Now and
then, however, he is horribly thoughtless, and seems to take a real
delight in giving me pain.  Then I feel, Harry, that I have given away
my whole soul to some one who treats it as if it were a flower to put
in his coat, a bit of decoration to charm his vanity, an ornament for a
summer's day."

"Days in summer, Basil, are apt to linger," murmured Lord Henry.
"Perhaps you will tire sooner than he will.  It is a sad thing to think
of, but there is no doubt that genius lasts longer than beauty.  That
accounts for the fact that we all take such pains to over-educate
ourselves.  In the wild struggle for existence, we want to have
something that endures, and so we fill our minds with rubbish and
facts, in the silly hope of keeping our place.  The thoroughly
well-informed man--that is the modern ideal.  And the mind of the
thoroughly well-informed man is a dreadful thing.  It is like a
_bric-a-brac_ shop, all monsters and dust, with everything priced above
its proper value.  I think you will tire first, all the same.  Some day
you will look at your friend, and he will seem to you to be a little
out of drawing, or you won't like his tone of colour, or something.
You will bitterly reproach him in your own heart, and seriously think
that he has behaved very badly to you.  The next time he calls, you
will be perfectly cold and indifferent.  It will be a great pity, for
it will alter you.  What you have told me is quite a romance, a romance
of art one might call it, and the worst of having a romance of any kind
is that it leaves one so unromantic."

"Harry, don't talk like that.  As long as I live, the personality of
Dorian Gray will dominate me.  You can't feel what I feel.  You change
too often."

"Ah, my dear Basil, that is exactly why I can feel it.  Those who are
faithful know only the trivial side of love: it is the faithless who
know love's tragedies."  And Lord Henry struck a light on a dainty
silver case and began to smoke a cigarette with a self-conscious and
satisfied air, as if he had summed up the world in a phrase.  There was
a rustle of chirruping sparrows in the green lacquer leaves of the ivy,
and the blue cloud-shadows chased themselves across the grass like
swallows.  How pleasant it was in the garden!  And how delightful other
people's emotions were!--much more delightful than their ideas, it
seemed to him.  One's own soul, and the passions of one's
friends--those were the fascinating things in life.  He pictured to
himself with silent amusement the tedious luncheon that he had missed
by staying so long with Basil Hallward.  Had he gone to his aunt's, he
would have been sure to have met Lord Goodbody there, and the whole
conversation would have been about the feeding of the poor and the
necessity for model lodging-houses. Each class would have preached the
importance of those virtues, for whose exercise there was no necessity
in their own lives.  The rich would have spoken on the value of thrift,
and the idle grown eloquent over the dignity of labour.  It was
charming to have escaped all that!  As he thought of his aunt, an idea
seemed to strike him.  He turned to Hallward and said, "My dear fellow,
I have just remembered."

"Remembered what, Harry?"

"Where I heard the name of Dorian Gray."

"Where was it?" asked Hallward, with a slight frown.

"Don't look so angry, Basil.  It was at my aunt, Lady Agatha's.  She
told me she had discovered a wonderful young man who was going to help
her in the East End, and that his name was Dorian Gray.  I am bound to
state that she never told me he was good-looking. Women have no
appreciation of good looks; at least, good women have not.  She said
that he was very earnest and had a beautiful nature.  I at once
pictured to myself a creature with spectacles and lank hair, horribly
freckled, and tramping about on huge feet.  I wish I had known it was
your friend."

"I am very glad you didn't, Harry."

"Why?"

"I don't want you to meet him."

"You don't want me to meet him?"

"No."

"Mr. Dorian Gray is in the studio, sir," said the butler, coming into
the garden.

"You must introduce me now," cried Lord Henry, laughing.

The painter turned to his servant, who stood blinking in the sunlight.
"Ask Mr. Gray to wait, Parker:  I shall be in in a few moments." The
man bowed and went up the walk.

Then he looked at Lord Henry.  "Dorian Gray is my dearest friend," he
said.  "He has a simple and a beautiful nature.  Your aunt was quite
right in what she said of him.  Don't spoil him.  Don't try to
influence him.  Your influence would be bad.  The world is wide, and
has many marvellous people in it.  Don't take away from me the one
person who gives to my art whatever charm it possesses:  my life as an
artist depends on him.  Mind, Harry, I trust you."  He spoke very
slowly, and the words seemed wrung out of him almost against his will.

"What nonsense you talk!" said Lord Henry, smiling, and taking Hallward
by the arm, he almost led him into the house.

As they entered they saw Dorian Gray.  He was seated at the piano, with
his back to them, turning over the pages of a volume of Schumann's
"Forest Scenes."  "You must lend me these, Basil," he cried.  "I want
to learn them.  They are perfectly charming."

"That entirely depends on how you sit to-day, Dorian."

"Oh, I am tired of sitting, and I don't want a life-sized portrait of
myself," answered the lad, swinging round on the music-stool in a
wilful, petulant manner.  When he caught sight of Lord Henry, a faint
blush coloured his cheeks for a moment, and he started up.  "I beg your
pardon, Basil, but I didn't know you had any one with you."

"This is Lord Henry Wotton, Dorian, an old Oxford friend of mine.  I
have just been telling him what a capital sitter you were, and now you
have spoiled everything."

"You have not spoiled my pleasure in meeting you, Mr. Gray," said Lord
Henry, stepping forward and extending his hand.  "My aunt has often
spoken to me about you.  You are one of her favourites, and, I am
afraid, one of her victims also."

"I am in Lady Agatha's black books at present," answered Dorian with a
funny look of penitence.  "I promised to go to a club in Whitechapel
with her last Tuesday, and I really forgot all about it.  We were to
have played a duet together--three duets, I believe.  I don't know what
she will say to me.  I am far too frightened to call."

"Oh, I will make your peace with my aunt.  She is quite devoted to you.
And I don't think it really matters about your not being there.  The
audience probably thought it was a duet.  When Aunt Agatha sits down to
the piano, she makes quite enough noise for two people."

"That is very horrid to her, and not very nice to me," answered Dorian,
laughing.

Lord Henry looked at him.  Yes, he was certainly wonderfully handsome,
with his finely curved scarlet lips, his frank blue eyes, his crisp
gold hair.  There was something in his face that made one trust him at
once.  All the candour of youth was there, as well as all youth's
passionate purity.  One felt that he had kept himself unspotted from
the world.  No wonder Basil Hallward worshipped him.

"You are too charming to go in for philanthropy, Mr. Gray--far too
charming." And Lord Henry flung himself down on the divan and opened
his cigarette-case.

The painter had been busy mixing his colours and getting his brushes
ready.  He was looking worried, and when he heard Lord Henry's last
remark, he glanced at him, hesitated for a moment, and then said,
"Harry, I want to finish this picture to-day. Would you think it
awfully rude of me if I asked you to go away?"

Lord Henry smiled and looked at Dorian Gray.  "Am I to go, Mr. Gray?"
he asked.

"Oh, please don't, Lord Henry.  I see that Basil is in one of his sulky
moods, and I can't bear him when he sulks.  Besides, I want you to tell
me why I should not go in for philanthropy."

"I don't know that I shall tell you that, Mr. Gray.  It is so tedious a
subject that one would have to talk seriously about it.  But I
certainly shall not run away, now that you have asked me to stop.  You
don't really mind, Basil, do you?  You have often told me that you
liked your sitters to have some one to chat to."

Hallward bit his lip.  "If Dorian wishes it, of course you must stay.
Dorian's whims are laws to everybody, except himself."

Lord Henry took up his hat and gloves.  "You are very pressing, Basil,
but I am afraid I must go.  I have promised to meet a man at the
Orleans.  Good-bye, Mr. Gray.  Come and see me some afternoon in Curzon
Street.  I am nearly always at home at five o'clock. Write to me when
you are coming.  I should be sorry to miss you."

"Basil," cried Dorian Gray, "if Lord Henry Wotton goes, I shall go,
too.  You never open your lips while you are painting, and it is
horribly dull standing on a platform and trying to look pleasant.  Ask
him to stay.  I insist upon it."

"Stay, Harry, to oblige Dorian, and to oblige me," said Hallward,
gazing intently at his picture.  "It is quite true, I never talk when I
am working, and never listen either, and it must be dreadfully tedious
for my unfortunate sitters.  I beg you to stay."

"But what about my man at the Orleans?"

The painter laughed.  "I don't think there will be any difficulty about
that.  Sit down again, Harry.  And now, Dorian, get up on the platform,
and don't move about too much, or pay any attention to what Lord Henry
says.  He has a very bad influence over all his friends, with the
single exception of myself."

Dorian Gray stepped up on the dais with the air of a young Greek
martyr, and made a little _moue_ of discontent to Lord Henry, to whom he
had rather taken a fancy.  He was so unlike Basil.  They made a
delightful contrast.  And he had such a beautiful voice.  After a few
moments he said to him, "Have you really a very bad influence, Lord
Henry?  As bad as Basil says?"

"There is no such thing as a good influence, Mr. Gray.  All influence
is immoral--immoral from the scientific point of view."

"Why?"

"Because to influence a person is to give him one's own soul.  He does
not think his natural thoughts, or burn with his natural passions.  His
virtues are not real to him.  His sins, if there are such things as
sins, are borrowed.  He becomes an echo of some one else's music, an
actor of a part that has not been written for him.  The aim of life is
self-development. To realize one's nature perfectly--that is what each
of us is here for.  People are afraid of themselves, nowadays.  They
have forgotten the highest of all duties, the duty that one owes to
one's self.  Of course, they are charitable.  They feed the hungry and
clothe the beggar.  But their own souls starve, and are naked.  Courage
has gone out of our race.  Perhaps we never really had it.  The terror
of society, which is the basis of morals, the terror of God, which is
the secret of religion--these are the two things that govern us.  And
yet--"

"Just turn your head a little more to the right, Dorian, like a good
boy," said the painter, deep in his work and conscious only that a look
had come into the lad's face that he had never seen there before.

"And yet," continued Lord Henry, in his low, musical voice, and with
that graceful wave of the hand that was always so characteristic of
him, and that he had even in his Eton days, "I believe that if one man
were to live out his life fully and completely, were to give form to
every feeling, expression to every thought, reality to every dream--I
believe that the world would gain such a fresh impulse of joy that we
would forget all the maladies of mediaevalism, and return to the
Hellenic ideal--to something finer, richer than the Hellenic ideal, it
may be.  But the bravest man amongst us is afraid of himself.  The
mutilation of the savage has its tragic survival in the self-denial
that mars our lives.  We are punished for our refusals.  Every impulse
that we strive to strangle broods in the mind and poisons us.  The body
sins once, and has done with its sin, for action is a mode of
purification.  Nothing remains then but the recollection of a pleasure,
or the luxury of a regret.  The only way to get rid of a temptation is
to yield to it.  Resist it, and your soul grows sick with longing for
the things it has forbidden to itself, with desire for what its
monstrous laws have made monstrous and unlawful.  It has been said that
the great events of the world take place in the brain.  It is in the
brain, and the brain only, that the great sins of the world take place
also.  You, Mr. Gray, you yourself, with your rose-red youth and your
rose-white boyhood, you have had passions that have made you afraid,
thoughts that have filled you with terror, day-dreams and sleeping
dreams whose mere memory might stain your cheek with shame--"

"Stop!" faltered Dorian Gray, "stop! you bewilder me.  I don't know
what to say.  There is some answer to you, but I cannot find it.  Don't
speak.  Let me think.  Or, rather, let me try not to think."

For nearly ten minutes he stood there, motionless, with parted lips and
eyes strangely bright.  He was dimly conscious that entirely fresh
influences were at work within him.  Yet they seemed to him to have
come really from himself.  The few words that Basil's friend had said
to him--words spoken by chance, no doubt, and with wilful paradox in
them--had touched some secret chord that had never been touched before,
but that he felt was now vibrating and throbbing to curious pulses.

Music had stirred him like that.  Music had troubled him many times.
But music was not articulate.  It was not a new world, but rather
another chaos, that it created in us.  Words!  Mere words!  How
terrible they were!  How clear, and vivid, and cruel!  One could not
escape from them.  And yet what a subtle magic there was in them!  They
seemed to be able to give a plastic form to formless things, and to
have a music of their own as sweet as that of viol or of lute.  Mere
words!  Was there anything so real as words?

Yes; there had been things in his boyhood that he had not understood.
He understood them now.  Life suddenly became fiery-coloured to him.
It seemed to him that he had been walking in fire.  Why had he not
known it?

With his subtle smile, Lord Henry watched him.  He knew the precise
psychological moment when to say nothing.  He felt intensely
interested.  He was amazed at the sudden impression that his words had
produced, and, remembering a book that he had read when he was sixteen,
a book which had revealed to him much that he had not known before, he
wondered whether Dorian Gray was passing through a similar experience.
He had merely shot an arrow into the air.  Had it hit the mark?  How
fascinating the lad was!

Hallward painted away with that marvellous bold touch of his, that had
the true refinement and perfect delicacy that in art, at any rate comes
only from strength.  He was unconscious of the silence.

"Basil, I am tired of standing," cried Dorian Gray suddenly.  "I must
go out and sit in the garden.  The air is stifling here."

"My dear fellow, I am so sorry.  When I am painting, I can't think of
anything else.  But you never sat better.  You were perfectly still.
And I have caught the effect I wanted--the half-parted lips and the
bright look in the eyes.  I don't know what Harry has been saying to
you, but he has certainly made you have the most wonderful expression.
I suppose he has been paying you compliments.  You mustn't believe a
word that he says."

"He has certainly not been paying me compliments.  Perhaps that is the
reason that I don't believe anything he has told me."

"You know you believe it all," said Lord Henry, looking at him with his
dreamy languorous eyes.  "I will go out to the garden with you.  It is
horribly hot in the studio.  Basil, let us have something iced to
drink, something with strawberries in it."

"Certainly, Harry.  Just touch the bell, and when Parker comes I will
tell him what you want.  I have got to work up this background, so I
will join you later on.  Don't keep Dorian too long.  I have never been
in better form for painting than I am to-day. This is going to be my
masterpiece.  It is my masterpiece as it stands."

Lord Henry went out to the garden and found Dorian Gray burying his
face in the great cool lilac-blossoms, feverishly drinking in their
perfume as if it had been wine.  He came close to him and put his hand
upon his shoulder.  "You are quite right to do that," he murmured.
"Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as nothing can cure the
senses but the soul."

The lad started and drew back.  He was bareheaded, and the leaves had
tossed his rebellious curls and tangled all their gilded threads.
There was a look of fear in his eyes, such as people have when they are
suddenly awakened.  His finely chiselled nostrils quivered, and some
hidden nerve shook the scarlet of his lips and left them trembling.

"Yes," continued Lord Henry, "that is one of the great secrets of
life--to cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means
of the soul.  You are a wonderful creation.  You know more than you
think you know, just as you know less than you want to know."

Dorian Gray frowned and turned his head away.  He could not help liking
the tall, graceful young man who was standing by him.  His romantic,
olive-coloured face and worn expression interested him.  There was
something in his low languid voice that was absolutely fascinating.
His cool, white, flowerlike hands, even, had a curious charm.  They
moved, as he spoke, like music, and seemed to have a language of their
own.  But he felt afraid of him, and ashamed of being afraid.  Why had
it been left for a stranger to reveal him to himself?  He had known
Basil Hallward for months, but the friendship between them had never
altered him.  Suddenly there had come some one across his life who
seemed to have disclosed to him life's mystery.  And, yet, what was
there to be afraid of?  He was not a schoolboy or a girl.  It was
absurd to be frightened.

"Let us go and sit in the shade," said Lord Henry.  "Parker has brought
out the drinks, and if you stay any longer in this glare, you will be
quite spoiled, and Basil will never paint you again.  You really must
not allow yourself to become sunburnt.  It would be unbecoming."

"What can it matter?" cried Dorian Gray, laughing, as he sat down on
the seat at the end of the garden.

"It should matter everything to you, Mr. Gray."

"Why?"

"Because you have the most marvellous youth, and youth is the one thing
worth having."

"I don't feel that, Lord Henry."

"No, you don't feel it now.  Some day, when you are old and wrinkled
and ugly, when thought has seared your forehead with its lines, and
passion branded your lips with its hideous fires, you will feel it, you
will feel it terribly.  Now, wherever you go, you charm the world.
Will it always be so? ... You have a wonderfully beautiful face, Mr.
Gray.  Don't frown.  You have.  And beauty is a form of genius--is
higher, indeed, than genius, as it needs no explanation.  It is of the
great facts of the world, like sunlight, or spring-time, or the
reflection in dark waters of that silver shell we call the moon.  It
cannot be questioned.  It has its divine right of sovereignty.  It
makes princes of those who have it.  You smile?  Ah! when you have lost
it you won't smile.... People say sometimes that beauty is only
superficial.  That may be so, but at least it is not so superficial as
thought is.  To me, beauty is the wonder of wonders.  It is only
shallow people who do not judge by appearances.  The true mystery of
the world is the visible, not the invisible.... Yes, Mr. Gray, the
gods have been good to you.  But what the gods give they quickly take
away.  You have only a few years in which to live really, perfectly,
and fully.  When your youth goes, your beauty will go with it, and then
you will suddenly discover that there are no triumphs left for you, or
have to content yourself with those mean triumphs that the memory of
your past will make more bitter than defeats.  Every month as it wanes
brings you nearer to something dreadful.  Time is jealous of you, and
wars against your lilies and your roses.  You will become sallow, and
hollow-cheeked, and dull-eyed.  You will suffer horribly.... Ah!
realize your youth while you have it.  Don't squander the gold of your
days, listening to the tedious, trying to improve the hopeless failure,
or giving away your life to the ignorant, the common, and the vulgar.
These are the sickly aims, the false ideals, of our age.  Live!  Live
the wonderful life that is in you!  Let nothing be lost upon you.  Be
always searching for new sensations.  Be afraid of nothing.... A new
Hedonism--that is what our century wants.  You might be its visible
symbol.  With your personality there is nothing you could not do.  The
world belongs to you for a season.... The moment I met you I saw that
you were quite unconscious of what you really are, of what you really
might be.  There was so much in you that charmed me that I felt I must
tell you something about yourself.  I thought how tragic it would be if
you were wasted.  For there is such a little time that your youth will
last--such a little time.  The common hill-flowers wither, but they
blossom again.  The laburnum will be as yellow next June as it is now.
In a month there will be purple stars on the clematis, and year after
year the green night of its leaves will hold its purple stars.  But we
never get back our youth.  The pulse of joy that beats in us at twenty
becomes sluggish.  Our limbs fail, our senses rot.  We degenerate into
hideous puppets, haunted by the memory of the passions of which we were
too much afraid, and the exquisite temptations that we had not the
courage to yield to.  Youth!  Youth!  There is absolutely nothing in
the world but youth!"

Dorian Gray listened, open-eyed and wondering.  The spray of lilac fell
from his hand upon the gravel.  A furry bee came and buzzed round it
for a moment.  Then it began to scramble all over the oval stellated
globe of the tiny blossoms.  He watched it with that strange interest
in trivial things that we try to develop when things of high import
make us afraid, or when we are stirred by some new emotion for which we
cannot find expression, or when some thought that terrifies us lays
sudden siege to the brain and calls on us to yield.  After a time the
bee flew away.  He saw it creeping into the stained trumpet of a Tyrian
convolvulus.  The flower seemed to quiver, and then swayed gently to
and fro.

Suddenly the painter appeared at the door of the studio and made
staccato signs for them to come in.  They turned to each other and
smiled.

"I am waiting," he cried.  "Do come in.  The light is quite perfect,
and you can bring your drinks."

They rose up and sauntered down the walk together.  Two green-and-white
butterflies fluttered past them, and in the pear-tree at the corner of
the garden a thrush began to sing.

"You are glad you have met me, Mr. Gray," said Lord Henry, looking at
him.

"Yes, I am glad now.  I wonder shall I always be glad?"

"Always!  That is a dreadful word.  It makes me shudder when I hear it.
Women are so fond of using it.  They spoil every romance by trying to
make it last for ever.  It is a meaningless word, too.  The only
difference between a caprice and a lifelong passion is that the caprice
lasts a little longer."

As they entered the studio, Dorian Gray put his hand upon Lord Henry's
arm.  "In that case, let our friendship be a caprice," he murmured,
flushing at his own boldness, then stepped up on the platform and
resumed his pose.

Lord Henry flung himself into a large wicker arm-chair and watched him.
The sweep and dash of the brush on the canvas made the only sound that
broke the stillness, except when, now and then, Hallward stepped back
to look at his work from a distance.  In the slanting beams that
streamed through the open doorway the dust danced and was golden.  The
heavy scent of the roses seemed to brood over everything.

After about a quarter of an hour Hallward stopped painting, looked for
a long time at Dorian Gray, and then for a long time at the picture,
biting the end of one of his huge brushes and frowning.  "It is quite
finished," he cried at last, and stooping down he wrote his name in
long vermilion letters on the left-hand corner of the canvas.

Lord Henry came over and examined the picture.  It was certainly a
wonderful work of art, and a wonderful likeness as well.

"My dear fellow, I congratulate you most warmly," he said.  "It is the
finest portrait of modern times.  Mr. Gray, come over and look at
yourself."

The lad started, as if awakened from some dream.

"Is it really finished?" he murmured, stepping down from the platform.

"Quite finished," said the painter.  "And you have sat splendidly
to-day. I am awfully obliged to you."

"That is entirely due to me," broke in Lord Henry.  "Isn't it, Mr.
Gray?"

Dorian made no answer, but passed listlessly in front of his picture
and turned towards it.  When he saw it he drew back, and his cheeks
flushed for a moment with pleasure.  A look of joy came into his eyes,
as if he had recognized himself for the first time.  He stood there
motionless and in wonder, dimly conscious that Hallward was speaking to
him, but not catching the meaning of his words.  The sense of his own
beauty came on him like a revelation.  He had never felt it before.
Basil Hallward's compliments had seemed to him to be merely the
charming exaggeration of friendship.  He had listened to them, laughed
at them, forgotten them.  They had not influenced his nature.  Then had
come Lord Henry Wotton with his strange panegyric on youth, his
terrible warning of its brevity.  That had stirred him at the time, and
now, as he stood gazing at the shadow of his own loveliness, the full
reality of the description flashed across him.  Yes, there would be a
day when his face would be wrinkled and wizen, his eyes dim and
colourless, the grace of his figure broken and deformed.  The scarlet
would pass away from his lips and the gold steal from his hair.  The
life that was to make his soul would mar his body.  He would become
dreadful, hideous, and uncouth.

As he thought of it, a sharp pang of pain struck through him like a
knife and made each delicate fibre of his nature quiver.  His eyes
deepened into amethyst, and across them came a mist of tears.  He felt
as if a hand of ice had been laid upon his heart.

"Don't you like it?" cried Hallward at last, stung a little by the
lad's silence, not understanding what it meant.

"Of course he likes it," said Lord Henry.  "Who wouldn't like it?  It
is one of the greatest things in modern art.  I will give you anything
you like to ask for it.  I must have it."

"It is not my property, Harry."

"Whose property is it?"

"Dorian's, of course," answered the painter.

"He is a very lucky fellow."

"How sad it is!" murmured Dorian Gray with his eyes still fixed upon
his own portrait.  "How sad it is!  I shall grow old, and horrible, and
dreadful.  But this picture will remain always young.  It will never be
older than this particular day of June.... If it were only the other
way!  If it were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was
to grow old!  For that--for that--I would give everything!  Yes, there
is nothing in the whole world I would not give!  I would give my soul
for that!"

"You would hardly care for such an arrangement, Basil," cried Lord
Henry, laughing.  "It would be rather hard lines on your work."

"I should object very strongly, Harry," said Hallward.

Dorian Gray turned and looked at him.  "I believe you would, Basil.
You like your art better than your friends.  I am no more to you than a
green bronze figure.  Hardly as much, I dare say."

The painter stared in amazement.  It was so unlike Dorian to speak like
that.  What had happened?  He seemed quite angry.  His face was flushed
and his cheeks burning.

"Yes," he continued, "I am less to you than your ivory Hermes or your
silver Faun.  You will like them always.  How long will you like me?
Till I have my first wrinkle, I suppose.  I know, now, that when one
loses one's good looks, whatever they may be, one loses everything.
Your picture has taught me that.  Lord Henry Wotton is perfectly right.
Youth is the only thing worth having.  When I find that I am growing
old, I shall kill myself."

Hallward turned pale and caught his hand.  "Dorian!  Dorian!" he cried,
"don't talk like that.  I have never had such a friend as you, and I
shall never have such another.  You are not jealous of material things,
are you?--you who are finer than any of them!"

"I am jealous of everything whose beauty does not die.  I am jealous of
the portrait you have painted of me.  Why should it keep what I must
lose?  Every moment that passes takes something from me and gives
something to it.  Oh, if it were only the other way!  If the picture
could change, and I could be always what I am now!  Why did you paint
it?  It will mock me some day--mock me horribly!"  The hot tears welled
into his eyes; he tore his hand away and, flinging himself on the
divan, he buried his face in the cushions, as though he was praying.

"This is your doing, Harry," said the painter bitterly.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "It is the real Dorian Gray--that
is all."

"It is not."

"If it is not, what have I to do with it?"

"You should have gone away when I asked you," he muttered.

"I stayed when you asked me," was Lord Henry's answer.

"Harry, I can't quarrel with my two best friends at once, but between
you both you have made me hate the finest piece of work I have ever
done, and I will destroy it.  What is it but canvas and colour?  I will
not let it come across our three lives and mar them."

Dorian Gray lifted his golden head from the pillow, and with pallid
face and tear-stained eyes, looked at him as he walked over to the deal
painting-table that was set beneath the high curtained window.  What
was he doing there?  His fingers were straying about among the litter
of tin tubes and dry brushes, seeking for something.  Yes, it was for
the long palette-knife, with its thin blade of lithe steel.  He had
found it at last.  He was going to rip up the canvas.

With a stifled sob the lad leaped from the couch, and, rushing over to
Hallward, tore the knife out of his hand, and flung it to the end of
the studio.  "Don't, Basil, don't!" he cried.  "It would be murder!"

"I am glad you appreciate my work at last, Dorian," said the painter
coldly when he had recovered from his surprise.  "I never thought you
would."

"Appreciate it?  I am in love with it, Basil.  It is part of myself.  I
feel that."

"Well, as soon as you are dry, you shall be varnished, and framed, and
sent home.  Then you can do what you like with yourself." And he walked
across the room and rang the bell for tea.  "You will have tea, of
course, Dorian?  And so will you, Harry?  Or do you object to such
simple pleasures?"

"I adore simple pleasures," said Lord Henry.  "They are the last refuge
of the complex.  But I don't like scenes, except on the stage.  What
absurd fellows you are, both of you!  I wonder who it was defined man
as a rational animal.  It was the most premature definition ever given.
Man is many things, but he is not rational.  I am glad he is not, after
all--though I wish you chaps would not squabble over the picture.  You
had much better let me have it, Basil.  This silly boy doesn't really
want it, and I really do."

"If you let any one have it but me, Basil, I shall never forgive you!"
cried Dorian Gray; "and I don't allow people to call me a silly boy."

"You know the picture is yours, Dorian.  I gave it to you before it
existed."

"And you know you have been a little silly, Mr. Gray, and that you
don't really object to being reminded that you are extremely young."

"I should have objected very strongly this morning, Lord Henry."

"Ah! this morning!  You have lived since then."

There came a knock at the door, and the butler entered with a laden
tea-tray and set it down upon a small Japanese table.  There was a
rattle of cups and saucers and the hissing of a fluted Georgian urn.
Two globe-shaped china dishes were brought in by a page.  Dorian Gray
went over and poured out the tea.  The two men sauntered languidly to
the table and examined what was under the covers.

"Let us go to the theatre to-night," said Lord Henry.  "There is sure
to be something on, somewhere.  I have promised to dine at White's, but
it is only with an old friend, so I can send him a wire to say that I
am ill, or that I am prevented from coming in consequence of a
subsequent engagement.  I think that would be a rather nice excuse:  it
would have all the surprise of candour."

"It is such a bore putting on one's dress-clothes," muttered Hallward.
"And, when one has them on, they are so horrid."

"Yes," answered Lord Henry dreamily, "the costume of the nineteenth
century is detestable.  It is so sombre, so depressing.  Sin is the
only real colour-element left in modern life."

"You really must not say things like that before Dorian, Harry."

"Before which Dorian?  The one who is pouring out tea for us, or the
one in the picture?"

"Before either."

"I should like to come to the theatre with you, Lord Henry," said the
lad.

"Then you shall come; and you will come, too, Basil, won't you?"

"I can't, really.  I would sooner not.  I have a lot of work to do."

"Well, then, you and I will go alone, Mr. Gray."

"I should like that awfully."

The painter bit his lip and walked over, cup in hand, to the picture.
"I shall stay with the real Dorian," he said, sadly.

"Is it the real Dorian?" cried the original of the portrait, strolling
across to him.  "Am I really like that?"

"Yes; you are just like that."

"How wonderful, Basil!"

"At least you are like it in appearance.  But it will never alter,"
sighed Hallward.  "That is something."

"What a fuss people make about fidelity!" exclaimed Lord Henry.  "Why,
even in love it is purely a question for physiology.  It has nothing to
do with our own will.  Young men want to be faithful, and are not; old
men want to be faithless, and cannot: that is all one can say."

"Don't go to the theatre to-night, Dorian," said Hallward.  "Stop and
dine with me."

"I can't, Basil."

"Why?"

"Because I have promised Lord Henry Wotton to go with him."

"He won't like you the better for keeping your promises.  He always
breaks his own.  I beg you not to go."

Dorian Gray laughed and shook his head.

"I entreat you."

The lad hesitated, and looked over at Lord Henry, who was watching them
from the tea-table with an amused smile.

"I must go, Basil," he answered.

"Very well," said Hallward, and he went over and laid down his cup on
the tray.  "It is rather late, and, as you have to dress, you had
better lose no time.  Good-bye, Harry.  Good-bye, Dorian.  Come and see
me soon.  Come to-morrow."

"Certainly."

"You won't forget?"

"No, of course not," cried Dorian.

"And ... Harry!"

"Yes, Basil?"

"Remember what I asked you, when we were in the garden this morning."

"I have forgotten it."

"I trust you."

"I wish I could trust myself," said Lord Henry, laughing.  "Come, Mr.
Gray, my hansom is outside, and I can drop you at your own place.
Good-bye, Basil.  It has been a most interesting afternoon."

As the door closed behind them, the painter flung himself down on a
sofa, and a look of pain came into his face.





At half-past twelve next day Lord Henry Wotton strolled from Curzon
Street over to the Albany to call on his uncle, Lord Fermor, a genial
if somewhat rough-mannered old bachelor, whom the outside world called
selfish because it derived no particular benefit from him, but who was
considered generous by Society as he fed the people who amused him.
His father had been our ambassador at Madrid when Isabella was young
and Prim unthought of, but had retired from the diplomatic service in a
capricious moment of annoyance on not being offered the Embassy at
Paris, a post to which he considered that he was fully entitled by
reason of his birth, his indolence, the good English of his dispatches,
and his inordinate passion for pleasure.  The son, who had been his
father's secretary, had resigned along with his chief, somewhat
foolishly as was thought at the time, and on succeeding some months
later to the title, had set himself to the serious study of the great
aristocratic art of doing absolutely nothing.  He had two large town
houses, but preferred to live in chambers as it was less trouble, and
took most of his meals at his club.  He paid some attention to the
management of his collieries in the Midland counties, excusing himself
for this taint of industry on the ground that the one advantage of
having coal was that it enabled a gentleman to afford the decency of
burning wood on his own hearth.  In politics he was a Tory, except when
the Tories were in office, during which period he roundly abused them
for being a pack of Radicals.  He was a hero to his valet, who bullied
him, and a terror to most of his relations, whom he bullied in turn.
Only England could have produced him, and he always said that the
country was going to the dogs.  His principles were out of date, but
there was a good deal to be said for his prejudices.

When Lord Henry entered the room, he found his uncle sitting in a rough
shooting-coat, smoking a cheroot and grumbling over _The Times_.  "Well,
Harry," said the old gentleman, "what brings you out so early?  I
thought you dandies never got up till two, and were not visible till
five."

"Pure family affection, I assure you, Uncle George.  I want to get
something out of you."

"Money, I suppose," said Lord Fermor, making a wry face.  "Well, sit
down and tell me all about it.  Young people, nowadays, imagine that
money is everything."

"Yes," murmured Lord Henry, settling his button-hole in his coat; "and
when they grow older they know it.  But I don't want money.  It is only
people who pay their bills who want that, Uncle George, and I never pay
mine.  Credit is the capital of a younger son, and one lives charmingly
upon it.  Besides, I always deal with Dartmoor's tradesmen, and
consequently they never bother me.  What I want is information:  not
useful information, of course; useless information."

"Well, I can tell you anything that is in an English Blue Book, Harry,
although those fellows nowadays write a lot of nonsense.  When I was in
the Diplomatic, things were much better.  But I hear they let them in
now by examination.  What can you expect?  Examinations, sir, are pure
humbug from beginning to end.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite
enough, and if he is not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him."

"Mr. Dorian Gray does not belong to Blue Books, Uncle George," said
Lord Henry languidly.

"Mr. Dorian Gray?  Who is he?" asked Lord Fermor, knitting his bushy
white eyebrows.

"That is what I have come to learn, Uncle George.  Or rather, I know
who he is.  He is the last Lord Kelso's grandson.  His mother was a
Devereux, Lady Margaret Devereux.  I want you to tell me about his
mother.  What was she like?  Whom did she marry?  You have known nearly
everybody in your time, so you might have known her.  I am very much
interested in Mr. Gray at present.  I have only just met him."

"Kelso's grandson!" echoed the old gentleman.  "Kelso's grandson! ...
Of course.... I knew his mother intimately.  I believe I was at her
christening.  She was an extraordinarily beautiful girl, Margaret
Devereux, and made all the men frantic by running away with a penniless
young fellow--a mere nobody, sir, a subaltern in a foot regiment, or
something of that kind.  Certainly.  I remember the whole thing as if
it happened yesterday.  The poor chap was killed in a duel at Spa a few
months after the marriage.  There was an ugly story about it.  They
said Kelso got some rascally adventurer, some Belgian brute, to insult
his son-in-law in public--paid him, sir, to do it, paid him--and that
the fellow spitted his man as if he had been a pigeon.  The thing was
hushed up, but, egad, Kelso ate his chop alone at the club for some
time afterwards.  He brought his daughter back with him, I was told,
and she never spoke to him again.  Oh, yes; it was a bad business.  The
girl died, too, died within a year.  So she left a son, did she?  I had
forgotten that.  What sort of boy is he?  If he is like his mother, he
must be a good-looking chap."

"He is very good-looking," assented Lord Henry.

"I hope he will fall into proper hands," continued the old man.  "He
should have a pot of money waiting for him if Kelso did the right thing
by him.  His mother had money, too.  All the Selby property came to
her, through her grandfather.  Her grandfather hated Kelso, thought him
a mean dog.  He was, too.  Came to Madrid once when I was there.  Egad,
I was ashamed of him.  The Queen used to ask me about the English noble
who was always quarrelling with the cabmen about their fares.  They
made quite a story of it.  I didn't dare show my face at Court for a
month.  I hope he treated his grandson better than he did the jarvies."

"I don't know," answered Lord Henry.  "I fancy that the boy will be
well off.  He is not of age yet.  He has Selby, I know.  He told me so.
And ... his mother was very beautiful?"

"Margaret Devereux was one of the loveliest creatures I ever saw,
Harry.  What on earth induced her to behave as she did, I never could
understand.  She could have married anybody she chose.  Carlington was
mad after her.  She was romantic, though.  All the women of that family
were.  The men were a poor lot, but, egad! the women were wonderful.
Carlington went on his knees to her.  Told me so himself.  She laughed
at him, and there wasn't a girl in London at the time who wasn't after
him.  And by the way, Harry, talking about silly marriages, what is
this humbug your father tells me about Dartmoor wanting to marry an
American?  Ain't English girls good enough for him?"

"It is rather fashionable to marry Americans just now, Uncle George."

"I'll back English women against the world, Harry," said Lord Fermor,
striking the table with his fist.

"The betting is on the Americans."

"They don't last, I am told," muttered his uncle.

"A long engagement exhausts them, but they are capital at a
steeplechase.  They take things flying.  I don't think Dartmoor has a
chance."

"Who are her people?" grumbled the old gentleman.  "Has she got any?"

Lord Henry shook his head.  "American girls are as clever at concealing
their parents, as English women are at concealing their past," he said,
rising to go.

"They are pork-packers, I suppose?"

"I hope so, Uncle George, for Dartmoor's sake.  I am told that
pork-packing is the most lucrative profession in America, after
politics."

"Is she pretty?"

"She behaves as if she was beautiful.  Most American women do.  It is
the secret of their charm."

"Why can't these American women stay in their own country?  They are
always telling us that it is the paradise for women."

"It is.  That is the reason why, like Eve, they are so excessively
anxious to get out of it," said Lord Henry.  "Good-bye, Uncle George.
I shall be late for lunch, if I stop any longer.  Thanks for giving me
the information I wanted.  I always like to know everything about my
new friends, and nothing about my old ones."

"Where are you lunching, Harry?"

"At Aunt Agatha's. I have asked myself and Mr. Gray.  He is her latest
_protege_."

"Humph! tell your Aunt Agatha, Harry, not to bother me any more with
her charity appeals.  I am sick of them.  Why, the good woman thinks
that I have nothing to do but to write cheques for her silly fads."

"All right, Uncle George, I'll tell her, but it won't have any effect.
Philanthropic people lose all sense of humanity.  It is their
distinguishing characteristic."

The old gentleman growled approvingly and rang the bell for his
servant.  Lord Henry passed up the low arcade into Burlington Street
and turned his steps in the direction of Berkeley Square.

So that was the story of Dorian Gray's parentage.  Crudely as it had
been told to him, it had yet stirred him by its suggestion of a
strange, almost modern romance.  A beautiful woman risking everything
for a mad passion.  A few wild weeks of happiness cut short by a
hideous, treacherous crime.  Months of voiceless agony, and then a
child born in pain.  The mother snatched away by death, the boy left to
solitude and the tyranny of an old and loveless man.  Yes; it was an
interesting background.  It posed the lad, made him more perfect, as it
were.  Behind every exquisite thing that existed, there was something
tragic.  Worlds had to be in travail, that the meanest flower might
blow.... And how charming he had been at dinner the night before, as
with startled eyes and lips parted in frightened pleasure he had sat
opposite to him at the club, the red candleshades staining to a richer
rose the wakening wonder of his face.  Talking to him was like playing
upon an exquisite violin.  He answered to every touch and thrill of the
bow.... There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of
influence.  No other activity was like it.  To project one's soul into
some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear one's
own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added music of
passion and youth; to convey one's temperament into another as though
it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume: there was a real joy in
that--perhaps the most satisfying joy left to us in an age so limited
and vulgar as our own, an age grossly carnal in its pleasures, and
grossly common in its aims.... He was a marvellous type, too, this lad,
whom by so curious a chance he had met in Basil's studio, or could be
fashioned into a marvellous type, at any rate.  Grace was his, and the
white purity of boyhood, and beauty such as old Greek marbles kept for
us.  There was nothing that one could not do with him.  He could be
made a Titan or a toy.  What a pity it was that such beauty was
destined to fade! ...  And Basil?  From a psychological point of view,
how interesting he was!  The new manner in art, the fresh mode of
looking at life, suggested so strangely by the merely visible presence
of one who was unconscious of it all; the silent spirit that dwelt in
dim woodland, and walked unseen in open field, suddenly showing
herself, Dryadlike and not afraid, because in his soul who sought for
her there had been wakened that wonderful vision to which alone are
wonderful things revealed; the mere shapes and patterns of things
becoming, as it were, refined, and gaining a kind of symbolical value,
as though they were themselves patterns of some other and more perfect
form whose shadow they made real:  how strange it all was!  He
remembered something like it in history.  Was it not Plato, that artist
in thought, who had first analyzed it?  Was it not Buonarotti who had
carved it in the coloured marbles of a sonnet-sequence? But in our own
century it was strange.... Yes; he would try to be to Dorian Gray
what, without knowing it, the lad was to the painter who had fashioned
the wonderful portrait.  He would seek to dominate him--had already,
indeed, half done so.  He would make that wonderful spirit his own.
There was something fascinating in this son of love and death.

Suddenly he stopped and glanced up at the houses.  He found that he had
passed his aunt's some distance, and, smiling to himself, turned back.
When he entered the somewhat sombre hall, the butler told him that they
had gone in to lunch.  He gave one of the footmen his hat and stick and
passed into the dining-room.

"Late as usual, Harry," cried his aunt, shaking her head at him.

He invented a facile excuse, and having taken the vacant seat next to
her, looked round to see who was there.  Dorian bowed to him shyly from
the end of the table, a flush of pleasure stealing into his cheek.
Opposite was the Duchess of Harley, a lady of admirable good-nature and
good temper, much liked by every one who knew her, and of those ample
architectural proportions that in women who are not duchesses are
described by contemporary historians as stoutness.  Next to her sat, on
her right, Sir Thomas Burdon, a Radical member of Parliament, who
followed his leader in public life and in private life followed the
best cooks, dining with the Tories and thinking with the Liberals, in
accordance with a wise and well-known rule.  The post on her left was
occupied by Mr. Erskine of Treadley, an old gentleman of considerable
charm and culture, who had fallen, however, into bad habits of silence,
having, as he explained once to Lady Agatha, said everything that he
had to say before he was thirty.  His own neighbour was Mrs. Vandeleur,
one of his aunt's oldest friends, a perfect saint amongst women, but so
dreadfully dowdy that she reminded one of a badly bound hymn-book.
Fortunately for him she had on the other side Lord Faudel, a most
intelligent middle-aged mediocrity, as bald as a ministerial statement
in the House of Commons, with whom she was conversing in that intensely
earnest manner which is the one unpardonable error, as he remarked once
himself, that all really good people fall into, and from which none of
them ever quite escape.

"We are talking about poor Dartmoor, Lord Henry," cried the duchess,
nodding pleasantly to him across the table.  "Do you think he will
really marry this fascinating young person?"

"I believe she has made up her mind to propose to him, Duchess."

"How dreadful!" exclaimed Lady Agatha.  "Really, some one should
interfere."

"I am told, on excellent authority, that her father keeps an American
dry-goods store," said Sir Thomas Burdon, looking supercilious.

"My uncle has already suggested pork-packing, Sir Thomas."

"Dry-goods! What are American dry-goods?" asked the duchess, raising
her large hands in wonder and accentuating the verb.

"American novels," answered Lord Henry, helping himself to some quail.

The duchess looked puzzled.

"Don't mind him, my dear," whispered Lady Agatha.  "He never means
anything that he says."

"When America was discovered," said the Radical member--and he began to
give some wearisome facts.  Like all people who try to exhaust a
subject, he exhausted his listeners.  The duchess sighed and exercised
her privilege of interruption.  "I wish to goodness it never had been
discovered at all!" she exclaimed.  "Really, our girls have no chance
nowadays.  It is most unfair."

"Perhaps, after all, America never has been discovered," said Mr.
Erskine; "I myself would say that it had merely been detected."

"Oh! but I have seen specimens of the inhabitants," answered the
duchess vaguely.  "I must confess that most of them are extremely
pretty.  And they dress well, too.  They get all their dresses in
Paris.  I wish I could afford to do the same."

"They say that when good Americans die they go to Paris," chuckled Sir
Thomas, who had a large wardrobe of Humour's cast-off clothes.

"Really!  And where do bad Americans go to when they die?" inquired the
duchess.

"They go to America," murmured Lord Henry.

Sir Thomas frowned.  "I am afraid that your nephew is prejudiced
against that great country," he said to Lady Agatha.  "I have travelled
all over it in cars provided by the directors, who, in such matters,
are extremely civil.  I assure you that it is an education to visit it."

"But must we really see Chicago in order to be educated?" asked Mr.
Erskine plaintively.  "I don't feel up to the journey."

Sir Thomas waved his hand.  "Mr. Erskine of Treadley has the world on
his shelves. We practical men like to see things, not to read about
them. The Americans are an extremely interesting people. They are
absolutely reasonable. I think that is their distinguishing
characteristic. Yes, Mr. Erskine, an absolutely reasonable people. I
assure you there is no nonsense about the Americans."

"How dreadful!" cried Lord Henry.  "I can stand brute force, but brute
reason is quite unbearable.  There is something unfair about its use.
It is hitting below the intellect."

"I do not understand you," said Sir Thomas, growing rather red.

"I do, Lord Henry," murmured Mr. Erskine, with a smile.

"Paradoxes are all very well in their way...." rejoined the baronet.

"Was that a paradox?" asked Mr. Erskine.  "I did not think so.  Perhaps
it was.  Well, the way of paradoxes is the way of truth.  To test
reality we must see it on the tight rope.  When the verities become
acrobats, we can judge them."

"Dear me!" said Lady Agatha, "how you men argue!  I am sure I never can
make out what you are talking about.  Oh!  Harry, I am quite vexed with
you.  Why do you try to persuade our nice Mr. Dorian Gray to give up
the East End?  I assure you he would be quite invaluable.  They would
love his playing."

"I want him to play to me," cried Lord Henry, smiling, and he looked
down the table and caught a bright answering glance.

"But they are so unhappy in Whitechapel," continued Lady Agatha.

"I can sympathize with everything except suffering," said Lord Henry,
shrugging his shoulders.  "I cannot sympathize with that.  It is too
ugly, too horrible, too distressing.  There is something terribly
morbid in the modern sympathy with pain.  One should sympathize with
the colour, the beauty, the joy of life.  The less said about life's
sores, the better."

"Still, the East End is a very important problem," remarked Sir Thomas
with a grave shake of the head.

"Quite so," answered the young lord.  "It is the problem of slavery,
and we try to solve it by amusing the slaves."

The politician looked at him keenly.  "What change do you propose,
then?" he asked.

Lord Henry laughed.  "I don't desire to change anything in England
except the weather," he answered.  "I am quite content with philosophic
contemplation.  But, as the nineteenth century has gone bankrupt
through an over-expenditure of sympathy, I would suggest that we should
appeal to science to put us straight.  The advantage of the emotions is
that they lead us astray, and the advantage of science is that it is
not emotional."

"But we have such grave responsibilities," ventured Mrs. Vandeleur
timidly.

"Terribly grave," echoed Lady Agatha.

Lord Henry looked over at Mr. Erskine.  "Humanity takes itself too
seriously.  It is the world's original sin.  If the caveman had known
how to laugh, history would have been different."

"You are really very comforting," warbled the duchess.  "I have always
felt rather guilty when I came to see your dear aunt, for I take no
interest at all in the East End.  For the future I shall be able to
look her in the face without a blush."

"A blush is very becoming, Duchess," remarked Lord Henry.

"Only when one is young," she answered.  "When an old woman like myself
blushes, it is a very bad sign.  Ah!  Lord Henry, I wish you would tell
me how to become young again."

He thought for a moment.  "Can you remember any great error that you
committed in your early days, Duchess?" he asked, looking at her across
the table.

"A great many, I fear," she cried.

"Then commit them over again," he said gravely.  "To get back one's
youth, one has merely to repeat one's follies."

"A delightful theory!" she exclaimed.  "I must put it into practice."

"A dangerous theory!" came from Sir Thomas's tight lips.  Lady Agatha
shook her head, but could not help being amused.  Mr. Erskine listened.

"Yes," he continued, "that is one of the great secrets of life.
Nowadays most people die of a sort of creeping common sense, and
discover when it is too late that the only things one never regrets are
one's mistakes."

A laugh ran round the table.

He played with the idea and grew wilful; tossed it into the air and
transformed it; let it escape and recaptured it; made it iridescent
with fancy and winged it with paradox.  The praise of folly, as he went
on, soared into a philosophy, and philosophy herself became young, and
catching the mad music of pleasure, wearing, one might fancy, her
wine-stained robe and wreath of ivy, danced like a Bacchante over the
hills of life, and mocked the slow Silenus for being sober.  Facts fled
before her like frightened forest things.  Her white feet trod the huge
press at which wise Omar sits, till the seething grape-juice rose round
her bare limbs in waves of purple bubbles, or crawled in red foam over
the vat's black, dripping, sloping sides.  It was an extraordinary
improvisation.  He felt that the eyes of Dorian Gray were fixed on him,
and the consciousness that amongst his audience there was one whose
temperament he wished to fascinate seemed to give his wit keenness and
to lend colour to his imagination.  He was brilliant, fantastic,
irresponsible.  He charmed his listeners out of themselves, and they
followed his pipe, laughing.  Dorian Gray never took his gaze off him,
but sat like one under a spell, smiles chasing each other over his lips
and wonder growing grave in his darkening eyes.

At last, liveried in the costume of the age, reality entered the room
in the shape of a servant to tell the duchess that her carriage was
waiting.  She wrung her hands in mock despair.  "How annoying!" she
cried.  "I must go.  I have to call for my husband at the club, to take
him to some absurd meeting at Willis's Rooms, where he is going to be
in the chair.  If I am late he is sure to be furious, and I couldn't
have a scene in this bonnet.  It is far too fragile.  A harsh word
would ruin it.  No, I must go, dear Agatha.  Good-bye, Lord Henry, you
are quite delightful and dreadfully demoralizing.  I am sure I don't
know what to say about your views.  You must come and dine with us some
night.  Tuesday?  Are you disengaged Tuesday?"

"For you I would throw over anybody, Duchess," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Ah! that is very nice, and very wrong of you," she cried; "so mind you
come"; and she swept out of the room, followed by Lady Agatha and the
other ladies.

When Lord Henry had sat down again, Mr. Erskine moved round, and taking
a chair close to him, placed his hand upon his arm.

"You talk books away," he said; "why don't you write one?"

"I am too fond of reading books to care to write them, Mr. Erskine.  I
should like to write a novel certainly, a novel that would be as lovely
as a Persian carpet and as unreal.  But there is no literary public in
England for anything except newspapers, primers, and encyclopaedias.
Of all people in the world the English have the least sense of the
beauty of literature."

"I fear you are right," answered Mr. Erskine.  "I myself used to have
literary ambitions, but I gave them up long ago.  And now, my dear
young friend, if you will allow me to call you so, may I ask if you
really meant all that you said to us at lunch?"

"I quite forget what I said," smiled Lord Henry.  "Was it all very bad?"

"Very bad indeed.  In fact I consider you extremely dangerous, and if
anything happens to our good duchess, we shall all look on you as being
primarily responsible.  But I should like to talk to you about life.
The generation into which I was born was tedious.  Some day, when you
are tired of London, come down to Treadley and expound to me your
philosophy of pleasure over some admirable Burgundy I am fortunate
enough to possess."

"I shall be charmed.  A visit to Treadley would be a great privilege.
It has a perfect host, and a perfect library."

"You will complete it," answered the old gentleman with a courteous
bow.  "And now I must bid good-bye to your excellent aunt.  I am due at
the Athenaeum.  It is the hour when we sleep there."

"All of you, Mr. Erskine?"

"Forty of us, in forty arm-chairs. We are practising for an English
Academy of Letters."

Lord Henry laughed and rose.  "I am going to the park," he cried.

As he was passing out of the door, Dorian Gray touched him on the arm.
"Let me come with you," he murmured.

"But I thought you had promised Basil Hallward to go and see him,"
answered Lord Henry.

"I would sooner come with you; yes, I feel I must come with you.  Do
let me.  And you will promise to talk to me all the time?  No one talks
so wonderfully as you do."

"Ah!  I have talked quite enough for to-day," said Lord Henry, smiling.
"All I want now is to look at life.  You may come and look at it with
me, if you care to."





One afternoon, a month later, Dorian Gray was reclining in a luxurious
arm-chair, in the little library of Lord Henry's house in Mayfair.  It
was, in its way, a very charming room, with its high panelled
wainscoting of olive-stained oak, its cream-coloured frieze and ceiling
of raised plasterwork, and its brickdust felt carpet strewn with silk,
long-fringed Persian rugs.  On a tiny satinwood table stood a statuette
by Clodion, and beside it lay a copy of Les Cent Nouvelles, bound for
Margaret of Valois by Clovis Eve and powdered with the gilt daisies
that Queen had selected for her device.  Some large blue china jars and
parrot-tulips were ranged on the mantelshelf, and through the small
leaded panes of the window streamed the apricot-coloured light of a
summer day in London.

Lord Henry had not yet come in.  He was always late on principle, his
principle being that punctuality is the thief of time.  So the lad was
looking rather sulky, as with listless fingers he turned over the pages
of an elaborately illustrated edition of Manon Lescaut that he had
found in one of the book-cases. The formal monotonous ticking of the
Louis Quatorze clock annoyed him.  Once or twice he thought of going
away.

At last he heard a step outside, and the door opened.  "How late you
are, Harry!" he murmured.

"I am afraid it is not Harry, Mr. Gray," answered a shrill voice.

He glanced quickly round and rose to his feet.  "I beg your pardon.  I
thought--"

"You thought it was my husband.  It is only his wife.  You must let me
introduce myself.  I know you quite well by your photographs.  I think
my husband has got seventeen of them."

"Not seventeen, Lady Henry?"

"Well, eighteen, then.  And I saw you with him the other night at the
opera."  She laughed nervously as she spoke, and watched him with her
vague forget-me-not eyes.  She was a curious woman, whose dresses
always looked as if they had been designed in a rage and put on in a
tempest.  She was usually in love with somebody, and, as her passion
was never returned, she had kept all her illusions.  She tried to look
picturesque, but only succeeded in being untidy.  Her name was
Victoria, and she had a perfect mania for going to church.

"That was at Lohengrin, Lady Henry, I think?"

"Yes; it was at dear Lohengrin.  I like Wagner's music better than
anybody's. It is so loud that one can talk the whole time without other
people hearing what one says.  That is a great advantage, don't you
think so, Mr. Gray?"

The same nervous staccato laugh broke from her thin lips, and her
fingers began to play with a long tortoise-shell paper-knife.

Dorian smiled and shook his head:  "I am afraid I don't think so, Lady
Henry.  I never talk during music--at least, during good music.  If one
hears bad music, it is one's duty to drown it in conversation."

"Ah! that is one of Harry's views, isn't it, Mr. Gray?  I always hear
Harry's views from his friends.  It is the only way I get to know of
them.  But you must not think I don't like good music.  I adore it, but
I am afraid of it.  It makes me too romantic.  I have simply worshipped
pianists--two at a time, sometimes, Harry tells me.  I don't know what
it is about them.  Perhaps it is that they are foreigners.  They all
are, ain't they?  Even those that are born in England become foreigners
after a time, don't they?  It is so clever of them, and such a
compliment to art.  Makes it quite cosmopolitan, doesn't it?  You have
never been to any of my parties, have you, Mr. Gray?  You must come.  I
can't afford orchids, but I spare no expense in foreigners.  They make
one's rooms look so picturesque.  But here is Harry!  Harry, I came in
to look for you, to ask you something--I forget what it was--and I
found Mr. Gray here.  We have had such a pleasant chat about music.  We
have quite the same ideas.  No; I think our ideas are quite different.
But he has been most pleasant.  I am so glad I've seen him."

"I am charmed, my love, quite charmed," said Lord Henry, elevating his
dark, crescent-shaped eyebrows and looking at them both with an amused
smile.  "So sorry I am late, Dorian.  I went to look after a piece of
old brocade in Wardour Street and had to bargain for hours for it.
Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."

"I am afraid I must be going," exclaimed Lady Henry, breaking an
awkward silence with her silly sudden laugh.  "I have promised to drive
with the duchess.  Good-bye, Mr. Gray.  Good-bye, Harry.  You are
dining out, I suppose?  So am I. Perhaps I shall see you at Lady
Thornbury's."

"I dare say, my dear," said Lord Henry, shutting the door behind her
as, looking like a bird of paradise that had been out all night in the
rain, she flitted out of the room, leaving a faint odour of
frangipanni.  Then he lit a cigarette and flung himself down on the
sofa.

"Never marry a woman with straw-coloured hair, Dorian," he said after a
few puffs.

"Why, Harry?"

"Because they are so sentimental."

"But I like sentimental people."

"Never marry at all, Dorian.  Men marry because they are tired; women,
because they are curious:  both are disappointed."

"I don't think I am likely to marry, Harry.  I am too much in love.
That is one of your aphorisms.  I am putting it into practice, as I do
everything that you say."

"Who are you in love with?" asked Lord Henry after a pause.

"With an actress," said Dorian Gray, blushing.

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "That is a rather commonplace
_debut_."

"You would not say so if you saw her, Harry."

"Who is she?"

"Her name is Sibyl Vane."

"Never heard of her."

"No one has.  People will some day, however.  She is a genius."

"My dear boy, no woman is a genius.  Women are a decorative sex.  They
never have anything to say, but they say it charmingly.  Women
represent the triumph of matter over mind, just as men represent the
triumph of mind over morals."

"Harry, how can you?"

"My dear Dorian, it is quite true.  I am analysing women at present, so
I ought to know.  The subject is not so abstruse as I thought it was.
I find that, ultimately, there are only two kinds of women, the plain
and the coloured.  The plain women are very useful.  If you want to
gain a reputation for respectability, you have merely to take them down
to supper.  The other women are very charming.  They commit one
mistake, however.  They paint in order to try and look young.  Our
grandmothers painted in order to try and talk brilliantly.  _Rouge_ and
_esprit_ used to go together.  That is all over now.  As long as a woman
can look ten years younger than her own daughter, she is perfectly
satisfied.  As for conversation, there are only five women in London
worth talking to, and two of these can't be admitted into decent
society.  However, tell me about your genius.  How long have you known
her?"

"Ah!  Harry, your views terrify me."

"Never mind that.  How long have you known her?"

"About three weeks."

"And where did you come across her?"

"I will tell you, Harry, but you mustn't be unsympathetic about it.
After all, it never would have happened if I had not met you.  You
filled me with a wild desire to know everything about life.  For days
after I met you, something seemed to throb in my veins.  As I lounged
in the park, or strolled down Piccadilly, I used to look at every one
who passed me and wonder, with a mad curiosity, what sort of lives they
led.  Some of them fascinated me.  Others filled me with terror.  There
was an exquisite poison in the air.  I had a passion for sensations....
Well, one evening about seven o'clock, I determined to go out in search
of some adventure.  I felt that this grey monstrous London of ours,
with its myriads of people, its sordid sinners, and its splendid sins,
as you once phrased it, must have something in store for me.  I fancied
a thousand things.  The mere danger gave me a sense of delight.  I
remembered what you had said to me on that wonderful evening when we
first dined together, about the search for beauty being the real secret
of life.  I don't know what I expected, but I went out and wandered
eastward, soon losing my way in a labyrinth of grimy streets and black
grassless squares.  About half-past eight I passed by an absurd little
theatre, with great flaring gas-jets and gaudy play-bills.  A hideous
Jew, in the most amazing waistcoat I ever beheld in my life, was
standing at the entrance, smoking a vile cigar.  He had greasy
ringlets, and an enormous diamond blazed in the centre of a soiled
shirt. 'Have a box, my Lord?' he said, when he saw me, and he took off
his hat with an air of gorgeous servility.  There was something about
him, Harry, that amused me.  He was such a monster.  You will laugh at
me, I know, but I really went in and paid a whole guinea for the
stage-box. To the present day I can't make out why I did so; and yet if
I hadn't--my dear Harry, if I hadn't--I should have missed the greatest
romance of my life.  I see you are laughing.  It is horrid of you!"

"I am not laughing, Dorian; at least I am not laughing at you.  But you
should not say the greatest romance of your life.  You should say the
first romance of your life.  You will always be loved, and you will
always be in love with love.  A _grande passion_ is the privilege of
people who have nothing to do.  That is the one use of the idle classes
of a country.  Don't be afraid.  There are exquisite things in store
for you.  This is merely the beginning."

"Do you think my nature so shallow?" cried Dorian Gray angrily.

"No; I think your nature so deep."

"How do you mean?"

"My dear boy, the people who love only once in their lives are really
the shallow people.  What they call their loyalty, and their fidelity,
I call either the lethargy of custom or their lack of imagination.
Faithfulness is to the emotional life what consistency is to the life
of the intellect--simply a confession of failure.  Faithfulness!  I
must analyse it some day.  The passion for property is in it.  There
are many things that we would throw away if we were not afraid that
others might pick them up.  But I don't want to interrupt you.  Go on
with your story."

"Well, I found myself seated in a horrid little private box, with a
vulgar drop-scene staring me in the face.  I looked out from behind the
curtain and surveyed the house.  It was a tawdry affair, all Cupids and
cornucopias, like a third-rate wedding-cake. The gallery and pit were
fairly full, but the two rows of dingy stalls were quite empty, and
there was hardly a person in what I suppose they called the
dress-circle.  Women went about with oranges and ginger-beer, and there
was a terrible consumption of nuts going on."

"It must have been just like the palmy days of the British drama."

"Just like, I should fancy, and very depressing.  I began to wonder
what on earth I should do when I caught sight of the play-bill.  What
do you think the play was, Harry?"

"I should think 'The Idiot Boy', or 'Dumb but Innocent'.  Our fathers
used to like that sort of piece, I believe.  The longer I live, Dorian,
the more keenly I feel that whatever was good enough for our fathers is
not good enough for us.  In art, as in politics, _les grandperes ont
toujours tort_."

"This play was good enough for us, Harry.  It was Romeo and Juliet.  I
must admit that I was rather annoyed at the idea of seeing Shakespeare
done in such a wretched hole of a place.  Still, I felt interested, in
a sort of way.  At any rate, I determined to wait for the first act.
There was a dreadful orchestra, presided over by a young Hebrew who sat
at a cracked piano, that nearly drove me away, but at last the
drop-scene was drawn up and the play began.  Romeo was a stout elderly
gentleman, with corked eyebrows, a husky tragedy voice, and a figure
like a beer-barrel. Mercutio was almost as bad.  He was played by the
low-comedian, who had introduced gags of his own and was on most
friendly terms with the pit.  They were both as grotesque as the
scenery, and that looked as if it had come out of a country-booth. But
Juliet!  Harry, imagine a girl, hardly seventeen years of age, with a
little, flowerlike face, a small Greek head with plaited coils of
dark-brown hair, eyes that were violet wells of passion, lips that were
like the petals of a rose.  She was the loveliest thing I had ever seen
in my life.  You said to me once that pathos left you unmoved, but that
beauty, mere beauty, could fill your eyes with tears.  I tell you,
Harry, I could hardly see this girl for the mist of tears that came
across me.  And her voice--I never heard such a voice.  It was very low
at first, with deep mellow notes that seemed to fall singly upon one's
ear.  Then it became a little louder, and sounded like a flute or a
distant hautboy.  In the garden-scene it had all the tremulous ecstasy
that one hears just before dawn when nightingales are singing.  There
were moments, later on, when it had the wild passion of violins.  You
know how a voice can stir one.  Your voice and the voice of Sibyl Vane
are two things that I shall never forget.  When I close my eyes, I hear
them, and each of them says something different.  I don't know which to
follow.  Why should I not love her?  Harry, I do love her.  She is
everything to me in life.  Night after night I go to see her play.  One
evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen.  I have
seen her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from
her lover's lips.  I have watched her wandering through the forest of
Arden, disguised as a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap.
She has been mad, and has come into the presence of a guilty king, and
given him rue to wear and bitter herbs to taste of.  She has been
innocent, and the black hands of jealousy have crushed her reedlike
throat.  I have seen her in every age and in every costume.  Ordinary
women never appeal to one's imagination.  They are limited to their
century.  No glamour ever transfigures them.  One knows their minds as
easily as one knows their bonnets.  One can always find them.  There is
no mystery in any of them.  They ride in the park in the morning and
chatter at tea-parties in the afternoon.  They have their stereotyped
smile and their fashionable manner.  They are quite obvious.  But an
actress!  How different an actress is!  Harry! why didn't you tell me
that the only thing worth loving is an actress?"

"Because I have loved so many of them, Dorian."

"Oh, yes, horrid people with dyed hair and painted faces."

"Don't run down dyed hair and painted faces.  There is an extraordinary
charm in them, sometimes," said Lord Henry.

"I wish now I had not told you about Sibyl Vane."

"You could not have helped telling me, Dorian.  All through your life
you will tell me everything you do."

"Yes, Harry, I believe that is true.  I cannot help telling you things.
You have a curious influence over me.  If I ever did a crime, I would
come and confess it to you.  You would understand me."

"People like you--the wilful sunbeams of life--don't commit crimes,
Dorian.  But I am much obliged for the compliment, all the same.  And
now tell me--reach me the matches, like a good boy--thanks--what are
your actual relations with Sibyl Vane?"

Dorian Gray leaped to his feet, with flushed cheeks and burning eyes.
"Harry!  Sibyl Vane is sacred!"

"It is only the sacred things that are worth touching, Dorian," said
Lord Henry, with a strange touch of pathos in his voice.  "But why
should you be annoyed?  I suppose she will belong to you some day.
When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one
always ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a
romance.  You know her, at any rate, I suppose?"

"Of course I know her.  On the first night I was at the theatre, the
horrid old Jew came round to the box after the performance was over and
offered to take me behind the scenes and introduce me to her.  I was
furious with him, and told him that Juliet had been dead for hundreds
of years and that her body was lying in a marble tomb in Verona.  I
think, from his blank look of amazement, that he was under the
impression that I had taken too much champagne, or something."

"I am not surprised."

"Then he asked me if I wrote for any of the newspapers.  I told him I
never even read them.  He seemed terribly disappointed at that, and
confided to me that all the dramatic critics were in a conspiracy
against him, and that they were every one of them to be bought."

"I should not wonder if he was quite right there.  But, on the other
hand, judging from their appearance, most of them cannot be at all
expensive."

"Well, he seemed to think they were beyond his means," laughed Dorian.
"By this time, however, the lights were being put out in the theatre,
and I had to go.  He wanted me to try some cigars that he strongly
recommended.  I declined.  The next night, of course, I arrived at the
place again.  When he saw me, he made me a low bow and assured me that
I was a munificent patron of art.  He was a most offensive brute,
though he had an extraordinary passion for Shakespeare.  He told me
once, with an air of pride, that his five bankruptcies were entirely
due to 'The Bard,' as he insisted on calling him.  He seemed to think
it a distinction."

"It was a distinction, my dear Dorian--a great distinction.  Most
people become bankrupt through having invested too heavily in the prose
of life.  To have ruined one's self over poetry is an honour.  But when
did you first speak to Miss Sibyl Vane?"

"The third night.  She had been playing Rosalind.  I could not help
going round.  I had thrown her some flowers, and she had looked at
me--at least I fancied that she had.  The old Jew was persistent.  He
seemed determined to take me behind, so I consented.  It was curious my
not wanting to know her, wasn't it?"

"No; I don't think so."

"My dear Harry, why?"

"I will tell you some other time.  Now I want to know about the girl."

"Sibyl?  Oh, she was so shy and so gentle.  There is something of a
child about her.  Her eyes opened wide in exquisite wonder when I told
her what I thought of her performance, and she seemed quite unconscious
of her power.  I think we were both rather nervous.  The old Jew stood
grinning at the doorway of the dusty greenroom, making elaborate
speeches about us both, while we stood looking at each other like
children.  He would insist on calling me 'My Lord,' so I had to assure
Sibyl that I was not anything of the kind.  She said quite simply to
me, 'You look more like a prince.  I must call you Prince Charming.'"

"Upon my word, Dorian, Miss Sibyl knows how to pay compliments."

"You don't understand her, Harry.  She regarded me merely as a person
in a play.  She knows nothing of life.  She lives with her mother, a
faded tired woman who played Lady Capulet in a sort of magenta
dressing-wrapper on the first night, and looks as if she had seen
better days."

"I know that look.  It depresses me," murmured Lord Henry, examining
his rings.

"The Jew wanted to tell me her history, but I said it did not interest
me."

"You were quite right.  There is always something infinitely mean about
other people's tragedies."

"Sibyl is the only thing I care about.  What is it to me where she came
from?  From her little head to her little feet, she is absolutely and
entirely divine.  Every night of my life I go to see her act, and every
night she is more marvellous."

"That is the reason, I suppose, that you never dine with me now.  I
thought you must have some curious romance on hand.  You have; but it
is not quite what I expected."

"My dear Harry, we either lunch or sup together every day, and I have
been to the opera with you several times," said Dorian, opening his
blue eyes in wonder.

"You always come dreadfully late."

"Well, I can't help going to see Sibyl play," he cried, "even if it is
only for a single act.  I get hungry for her presence; and when I think
of the wonderful soul that is hidden away in that little ivory body, I
am filled with awe."

"You can dine with me to-night, Dorian, can't you?"

He shook his head.  "To-night she is Imogen," he answered, "and
to-morrow night she will be Juliet."

"When is she Sibyl Vane?"

"Never."

"I congratulate you."

"How horrid you are!  She is all the great heroines of the world in
one.  She is more than an individual.  You laugh, but I tell you she
has genius.  I love her, and I must make her love me.  You, who know
all the secrets of life, tell me how to charm Sibyl Vane to love me!  I
want to make Romeo jealous.  I want the dead lovers of the world to
hear our laughter and grow sad.  I want a breath of our passion to stir
their dust into consciousness, to wake their ashes into pain.  My God,
Harry, how I worship her!"  He was walking up and down the room as he
spoke.  Hectic spots of red burned on his cheeks.  He was terribly
excited.

Lord Henry watched him with a subtle sense of pleasure.  How different
he was now from the shy frightened boy he had met in Basil Hallward's
studio!  His nature had developed like a flower, had borne blossoms of
scarlet flame.  Out of its secret hiding-place had crept his soul, and
desire had come to meet it on the way.

"And what do you propose to do?" said Lord Henry at last.

"I want you and Basil to come with me some night and see her act.  I
have not the slightest fear of the result.  You are certain to
acknowledge her genius.  Then we must get her out of the Jew's hands.
She is bound to him for three years--at least for two years and eight
months--from the present time.  I shall have to pay him something, of
course.  When all that is settled, I shall take a West End theatre and
bring her out properly.  She will make the world as mad as she has made
me."

"That would be impossible, my dear boy."

"Yes, she will.  She has not merely art, consummate art-instinct, in
her, but she has personality also; and you have often told me that it
is personalities, not principles, that move the age."

"Well, what night shall we go?"

"Let me see.  To-day is Tuesday.  Let us fix to-morrow. She plays
Juliet to-morrow."

"All right.  The Bristol at eight o'clock; and I will get Basil."

"Not eight, Harry, please.  Half-past six.  We must be there before the
curtain rises.  You must see her in the first act, where she meets
Romeo."

"Half-past six!  What an hour!  It will be like having a meat-tea, or
reading an English novel.  It must be seven.  No gentleman dines before
seven.  Shall you see Basil between this and then?  Or shall I write to
him?"

"Dear Basil!  I have not laid eyes on him for a week.  It is rather
horrid of me, as he has sent me my portrait in the most wonderful
frame, specially designed by himself, and, though I am a little jealous
of the picture for being a whole month younger than I am, I must admit
that I delight in it.  Perhaps you had better write to him.  I don't
want to see him alone.  He says things that annoy me.  He gives me good
advice."

Lord Henry smiled.  "People are very fond of giving away what they need
most themselves.  It is what I call the depth of generosity."

"Oh, Basil is the best of fellows, but he seems to me to be just a bit
of a Philistine.  Since I have known you, Harry, I have discovered
that."

"Basil, my dear boy, puts everything that is charming in him into his
work.  The consequence is that he has nothing left for life but his
prejudices, his principles, and his common sense.  The only artists I
have ever known who are personally delightful are bad artists.  Good
artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly
uninteresting in what they are.  A great poet, a really great poet, is
the most unpoetical of all creatures.  But inferior poets are
absolutely fascinating.  The worse their rhymes are, the more
picturesque they look.  The mere fact of having published a book of
second-rate sonnets makes a man quite irresistible.  He lives the
poetry that he cannot write.  The others write the poetry that they
dare not realize."

"I wonder is that really so, Harry?" said Dorian Gray, putting some
perfume on his handkerchief out of a large, gold-topped bottle that
stood on the table.  "It must be, if you say it.  And now I am off.
Imogen is waiting for me.  Don't forget about to-morrow. Good-bye."

As he left the room, Lord Henry's heavy eyelids drooped, and he began
to think.  Certainly few people had ever interested him so much as
Dorian Gray, and yet the lad's mad adoration of some one else caused
him not the slightest pang of annoyance or jealousy.  He was pleased by
it.  It made him a more interesting study.  He had been always
enthralled by the methods of natural science, but the ordinary
subject-matter of that science had seemed to him trivial and of no
import.  And so he had begun by vivisecting himself, as he had ended by
vivisecting others.  Human life--that appeared to him the one thing
worth investigating.  Compared to it there was nothing else of any
value.  It was true that as one watched life in its curious crucible of
pain and pleasure, one could not wear over one's face a mask of glass,
nor keep the sulphurous fumes from troubling the brain and making the
imagination turbid with monstrous fancies and misshapen dreams.  There
were poisons so subtle that to know their properties one had to sicken
of them.  There were maladies so strange that one had to pass through
them if one sought to understand their nature.  And, yet, what a great
reward one received!  How wonderful the whole world became to one!  To
note the curious hard logic of passion, and the emotional coloured life
of the intellect--to observe where they met, and where they separated,
at what point they were in unison, and at what point they were at
discord--there was a delight in that!  What matter what the cost was?
One could never pay too high a price for any sensation.

He was conscious--and the thought brought a gleam of pleasure into his
brown agate eyes--that it was through certain words of his, musical
words said with musical utterance, that Dorian Gray's soul had turned
to this white girl and bowed in worship before her.  To a large extent
the lad was his own creation.  He had made him premature.  That was
something.  Ordinary people waited till life disclosed to them its
secrets, but to the few, to the elect, the mysteries of life were
revealed before the veil was drawn away.  Sometimes this was the effect
of art, and chiefly of the art of literature, which dealt immediately
with the passions and the intellect.  But now and then a complex
personality took the place and assumed the office of art, was indeed,
in its way, a real work of art, life having its elaborate masterpieces,
just as poetry has, or sculpture, or painting.

Yes, the lad was premature.  He was gathering his harvest while it was
yet spring.  The pulse and passion of youth were in him, but he was
becoming self-conscious. It was delightful to watch him.  With his
beautiful face, and his beautiful soul, he was a thing to wonder at.
It was no matter how it all ended, or was destined to end.  He was like
one of those gracious figures in a pageant or a play, whose joys seem
to be remote from one, but whose sorrows stir one's sense of beauty,
and whose wounds are like red roses.

Soul and body, body and soul--how mysterious they were!  There was
animalism in the soul, and the body had its moments of spirituality.
The senses could refine, and the intellect could degrade.  Who could
say where the fleshly impulse ceased, or the psychical impulse began?
How shallow were the arbitrary definitions of ordinary psychologists!
And yet how difficult to decide between the claims of the various
schools!  Was the soul a shadow seated in the house of sin?  Or was the
body really in the soul, as Giordano Bruno thought?  The separation of
spirit from matter was a mystery, and the union of spirit with matter
was a mystery also.

He began to wonder whether we could ever make psychology so absolute a
science that each little spring of life would be revealed to us.  As it
was, we always misunderstood ourselves and rarely understood others.
Experience was of no ethical value.  It was merely the name men gave to
their mistakes.  Moralists had, as a rule, regarded it as a mode of
warning, had claimed for it a certain ethical efficacy in the formation
of character, had praised it as something that taught us what to follow
and showed us what to avoid.  But there was no motive power in
experience.  It was as little of an active cause as conscience itself.
All that it really demonstrated was that our future would be the same
as our past, and that the sin we had done once, and with loathing, we
would do many times, and with joy.

It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to
promise rich and fruitful results.  His sudden mad love for Sibyl Vane
was a psychological phenomenon of no small interest.  There was no
doubt that curiosity had much to do with it, curiosity and the desire
for new experiences, yet it was not a simple, but rather a very complex
passion.  What there was in it of the purely sensuous instinct of
boyhood had been transformed by the workings of the imagination,
changed into something that seemed to the lad himself to be remote from
sense, and was for that very reason all the more dangerous.  It was the
passions about whose origin we deceived ourselves that tyrannized most
strongly over us.  Our weakest motives were those of whose nature we
were conscious.  It often happened that when we thought we were
experimenting on others we were really experimenting on ourselves.

While Lord Henry sat dreaming on these things, a knock came to the
door, and his valet entered and reminded him it was time to dress for
dinner.  He got up and looked out into the street.  The sunset had
smitten into scarlet gold the upper windows of the houses opposite.
The panes glowed like plates of heated metal.  The sky above was like a
faded rose.  He thought of his friend's young fiery-coloured life and
wondered how it was all going to end.

When he arrived home, about half-past twelve o'clock, he saw a telegram
lying on the hall table.  He opened it and found it was from Dorian
Gray.  It was to tell him that he was engaged to be married to Sibyl
Vane.





"Mother, Mother, I am so happy!" whispered the girl, burying her face
in the lap of the faded, tired-looking woman who, with back turned to
the shrill intrusive light, was sitting in the one arm-chair that their
dingy sitting-room contained.  "I am so happy!" she repeated, "and you
must be happy, too!"

Mrs. Vane winced and put her thin, bismuth-whitened hands on her
daughter's head.  "Happy!" she echoed, "I am only happy, Sibyl, when I
see you act.  You must not think of anything but your acting.  Mr.
Isaacs has been very good to us, and we owe him money."

The girl looked up and pouted.  "Money, Mother?" she cried, "what does
money matter?  Love is more than money."

"Mr. Isaacs has advanced us fifty pounds to pay off our debts and to
get a proper outfit for James.  You must not forget that, Sibyl.  Fifty
pounds is a very large sum.  Mr. Isaacs has been most considerate."

"He is not a gentleman, Mother, and I hate the way he talks to me,"
said the girl, rising to her feet and going over to the window.

"I don't know how we could manage without him," answered the elder
woman querulously.

Sibyl Vane tossed her head and laughed.  "We don't want him any more,
Mother.  Prince Charming rules life for us now." Then she paused.  A
rose shook in her blood and shadowed her cheeks.  Quick breath parted
the petals of her lips.  They trembled.  Some southern wind of passion
swept over her and stirred the dainty folds of her dress.  "I love
him," she said simply.

"Foolish child! foolish child!" was the parrot-phrase flung in answer.
The waving of crooked, false-jewelled fingers gave grotesqueness to the
words.

The girl laughed again.  The joy of a caged bird was in her voice.  Her
eyes caught the melody and echoed it in radiance, then closed for a
moment, as though to hide their secret.  When they opened, the mist of
a dream had passed across them.

Thin-lipped wisdom spoke at her from the worn chair, hinted at
prudence, quoted from that book of cowardice whose author apes the name
of common sense.  She did not listen.  She was free in her prison of
passion.  Her prince, Prince Charming, was with her.  She had called on
memory to remake him.  She had sent her soul to search for him, and it
had brought him back.  His kiss burned again upon her mouth.  Her
eyelids were warm with his breath.

Then wisdom altered its method and spoke of espial and discovery.  This
young man might be rich.  If so, marriage should be thought of.
Against the shell of her ear broke the waves of worldly cunning.  The
arrows of craft shot by her.  She saw the thin lips moving, and smiled.

Suddenly she felt the need to speak.  The wordy silence troubled her.
"Mother, Mother," she cried, "why does he love me so much?  I know why
I love him.  I love him because he is like what love himself should be.
But what does he see in me?  I am not worthy of him.  And yet--why, I
cannot tell--though I feel so much beneath him, I don't feel humble.  I
feel proud, terribly proud.  Mother, did you love my father as I love
Prince Charming?"

The elder woman grew pale beneath the coarse powder that daubed her
cheeks, and her dry lips twitched with a spasm of pain.  Sybil rushed
to her, flung her arms round her neck, and kissed her.  "Forgive me,
Mother.  I know it pains you to talk about our father.  But it only
pains you because you loved him so much.  Don't look so sad.  I am as
happy to-day as you were twenty years ago.  Ah! let me be happy for
ever!"

"My child, you are far too young to think of falling in love.  Besides,
what do you know of this young man?  You don't even know his name.  The
whole thing is most inconvenient, and really, when James is going away
to Australia, and I have so much to think of, I must say that you
should have shown more consideration.  However, as I said before, if he
is rich ..."

"Ah!  Mother, Mother, let me be happy!"

Mrs. Vane glanced at her, and with one of those false theatrical
gestures that so often become a mode of second nature to a
stage-player, clasped her in her arms.  At this moment, the door opened
and a young lad with rough brown hair came into the room.  He was
thick-set of figure, and his hands and feet were large and somewhat
clumsy in movement.  He was not so finely bred as his sister.  One
would hardly have guessed the close relationship that existed between
them.  Mrs. Vane fixed her eyes on him and intensified her smile.  She
mentally elevated her son to the dignity of an audience.  She felt sure
that the _tableau_ was interesting.

"You might keep some of your kisses for me, Sibyl, I think," said the
lad with a good-natured grumble.

"Ah! but you don't like being kissed, Jim," she cried.  "You are a
dreadful old bear."  And she ran across the room and hugged him.

James Vane looked into his sister's face with tenderness.  "I want you
to come out with me for a walk, Sibyl.  I don't suppose I shall ever
see this horrid London again.  I am sure I don't want to."

"My son, don't say such dreadful things," murmured Mrs. Vane, taking up
a tawdry theatrical dress, with a sigh, and beginning to patch it.  She
felt a little disappointed that he had not joined the group.  It would
have increased the theatrical picturesqueness of the situation.

"Why not, Mother?  I mean it."

"You pain me, my son.  I trust you will return from Australia in a
position of affluence.  I believe there is no society of any kind in
the Colonies--nothing that I would call society--so when you have made
your fortune, you must come back and assert yourself in London."

"Society!" muttered the lad.  "I don't want to know anything about
that.  I should like to make some money to take you and Sibyl off the
stage.  I hate it."

"Oh, Jim!" said Sibyl, laughing, "how unkind of you!  But are you
really going for a walk with me?  That will be nice!  I was afraid you
were going to say good-bye to some of your friends--to Tom Hardy, who
gave you that hideous pipe, or Ned Langton, who makes fun of you for
smoking it.  It is very sweet of you to let me have your last
afternoon.  Where shall we go?  Let us go to the park."

"I am too shabby," he answered, frowning.  "Only swell people go to the
park."

"Nonsense, Jim," she whispered, stroking the sleeve of his coat.

He hesitated for a moment.  "Very well," he said at last, "but don't be
too long dressing."  She danced out of the door.  One could hear her
singing as she ran upstairs.  Her little feet pattered overhead.

He walked up and down the room two or three times.  Then he turned to
the still figure in the chair.  "Mother, are my things ready?" he asked.

"Quite ready, James," she answered, keeping her eyes on her work.  For
some months past she had felt ill at ease when she was alone with this
rough stern son of hers.  Her shallow secret nature was troubled when
their eyes met.  She used to wonder if he suspected anything.  The
silence, for he made no other observation, became intolerable to her.
She began to complain.  Women defend themselves by attacking, just as
they attack by sudden and strange surrenders.  "I hope you will be
contented, James, with your sea-faring life," she said.  "You must
remember that it is your own choice.  You might have entered a
solicitor's office.  Solicitors are a very respectable class, and in
the country often dine with the best families."

"I hate offices, and I hate clerks," he replied.  "But you are quite
right.  I have chosen my own life.  All I say is, watch over Sibyl.
Don't let her come to any harm.  Mother, you must watch over her."

"James, you really talk very strangely.  Of course I watch over Sibyl."

"I hear a gentleman comes every night to the theatre and goes behind to
talk to her.  Is that right?  What about that?"

"You are speaking about things you don't understand, James.  In the
profession we are accustomed to receive a great deal of most gratifying
attention.  I myself used to receive many bouquets at one time.  That
was when acting was really understood.  As for Sibyl, I do not know at
present whether her attachment is serious or not.  But there is no
doubt that the young man in question is a perfect gentleman.  He is
always most polite to me.  Besides, he has the appearance of being
rich, and the flowers he sends are lovely."

"You don't know his name, though," said the lad harshly.

"No," answered his mother with a placid expression in her face.  "He
has not yet revealed his real name.  I think it is quite romantic of
him.  He is probably a member of the aristocracy."

James Vane bit his lip.  "Watch over Sibyl, Mother," he cried, "watch
over her."

"My son, you distress me very much.  Sibyl is always under my special
care.  Of course, if this gentleman is wealthy, there is no reason why
she should not contract an alliance with him.  I trust he is one of the
aristocracy.  He has all the appearance of it, I must say.  It might be
a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.  They would make a charming
couple.  His good looks are really quite remarkable; everybody notices
them."

The lad muttered something to himself and drummed on the window-pane
with his coarse fingers.  He had just turned round to say something
when the door opened and Sibyl ran in.

"How serious you both are!" she cried.  "What is the matter?"

"Nothing," he answered.  "I suppose one must be serious sometimes.
Good-bye, Mother; I will have my dinner at five o'clock. Everything is
packed, except my shirts, so you need not trouble."

"Good-bye, my son," she answered with a bow of strained stateliness.

She was extremely annoyed at the tone he had adopted with her, and
there was something in his look that had made her feel afraid.

"Kiss me, Mother," said the girl.  Her flowerlike lips touched the
withered cheek and warmed its frost.

"My child! my child!" cried Mrs. Vane, looking up to the ceiling in
search of an imaginary gallery.

"Come, Sibyl," said her brother impatiently.  He hated his mother's
affectations.

They went out into the flickering, wind-blown sunlight and strolled
down the dreary Euston Road.  The passersby glanced in wonder at the
sullen heavy youth who, in coarse, ill-fitting clothes, was in the
company of such a graceful, refined-looking girl.  He was like a common
gardener walking with a rose.

Jim frowned from time to time when he caught the inquisitive glance of
some stranger.  He had that dislike of being stared at, which comes on
geniuses late in life and never leaves the commonplace.  Sibyl,
however, was quite unconscious of the effect she was producing.  Her
love was trembling in laughter on her lips.  She was thinking of Prince
Charming, and, that she might think of him all the more, she did not
talk of him, but prattled on about the ship in which Jim was going to
sail, about the gold he was certain to find, about the wonderful
heiress whose life he was to save from the wicked, red-shirted
bushrangers.  For he was not to remain a sailor, or a supercargo, or
whatever he was going to be.  Oh, no!  A sailor's existence was
dreadful.  Fancy being cooped up in a horrid ship, with the hoarse,
hump-backed waves trying to get in, and a black wind blowing the masts
down and tearing the sails into long screaming ribands!  He was to
leave the vessel at Melbourne, bid a polite good-bye to the captain,
and go off at once to the gold-fields. Before a week was over he was to
come across a large nugget of pure gold, the largest nugget that had
ever been discovered, and bring it down to the coast in a waggon
guarded by six mounted policemen.  The bushrangers were to attack them
three times, and be defeated with immense slaughter.  Or, no.  He was
not to go to the gold-fields at all.  They were horrid places, where
men got intoxicated, and shot each other in bar-rooms, and used bad
language.  He was to be a nice sheep-farmer, and one evening, as he was
riding home, he was to see the beautiful heiress being carried off by a
robber on a black horse, and give chase, and rescue her.  Of course,
she would fall in love with him, and he with her, and they would get
married, and come home, and live in an immense house in London.  Yes,
there were delightful things in store for him.  But he must be very
good, and not lose his temper, or spend his money foolishly.  She was
only a year older than he was, but she knew so much more of life.  He
must be sure, also, to write to her by every mail, and to say his
prayers each night before he went to sleep.  God was very good, and
would watch over him.  She would pray for him, too, and in a few years
he would come back quite rich and happy.

The lad listened sulkily to her and made no answer.  He was heart-sick
at leaving home.

Yet it was not this alone that made him gloomy and morose.
Inexperienced though he was, he had still a strong sense of the danger
of Sibyl's position.  This young dandy who was making love to her could
mean her no good.  He was a gentleman, and he hated him for that, hated
him through some curious race-instinct for which he could not account,
and which for that reason was all the more dominant within him.  He was
conscious also of the shallowness and vanity of his mother's nature,
and in that saw infinite peril for Sibyl and Sibyl's happiness.
Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge
them; sometimes they forgive them.

His mother!  He had something on his mind to ask of her, something that
he had brooded on for many months of silence.  A chance phrase that he
had heard at the theatre, a whispered sneer that had reached his ears
one night as he waited at the stage-door, had set loose a train of
horrible thoughts.  He remembered it as if it had been the lash of a
hunting-crop across his face.  His brows knit together into a wedge-like
furrow, and with a twitch of pain he bit his underlip.

"You are not listening to a word I am saying, Jim," cried Sibyl, "and I
am making the most delightful plans for your future.  Do say something."

"What do you want me to say?"

"Oh! that you will be a good boy and not forget us," she answered,
smiling at him.

He shrugged his shoulders.  "You are more likely to forget me than I am
to forget you, Sibyl."

She flushed.  "What do you mean, Jim?" she asked.

"You have a new friend, I hear.  Who is he?  Why have you not told me
about him?  He means you no good."

"Stop, Jim!" she exclaimed.  "You must not say anything against him.  I
love him."

"Why, you don't even know his name," answered the lad.  "Who is he?  I
have a right to know."

"He is called Prince Charming.  Don't you like the name.  Oh! you silly
boy! you should never forget it.  If you only saw him, you would think
him the most wonderful person in the world.  Some day you will meet
him--when you come back from Australia.  You will like him so much.
Everybody likes him, and I ... love him.  I wish you could come to the
theatre to-night. He is going to be there, and I am to play Juliet.
Oh! how I shall play it!  Fancy, Jim, to be in love and play Juliet!
To have him sitting there!  To play for his delight!  I am afraid I may
frighten the company, frighten or enthrall them.  To be in love is to
surpass one's self.  Poor dreadful Mr. Isaacs will be shouting 'genius'
to his loafers at the bar.  He has preached me as a dogma; to-night he
will announce me as a revelation.  I feel it.  And it is all his, his
only, Prince Charming, my wonderful lover, my god of graces.  But I am
poor beside him.  Poor?  What does that matter?  When poverty creeps in
at the door, love flies in through the window.  Our proverbs want
rewriting.  They were made in winter, and it is summer now; spring-time
for me, I think, a very dance of blossoms in blue skies."

"He is a gentleman," said the lad sullenly.

"A prince!" she cried musically.  "What more do you want?"

"He wants to enslave you."

"I shudder at the thought of being free."

"I want you to beware of him."

"To see him is to worship him; to know him is to trust him."

"Sibyl, you are mad about him."

She laughed and took his arm.  "You dear old Jim, you talk as if you
were a hundred.  Some day you will be in love yourself.  Then you will
know what it is.  Don't look so sulky.  Surely you should be glad to
think that, though you are going away, you leave me happier than I have
ever been before.  Life has been hard for us both, terribly hard and
difficult.  But it will be different now.  You are going to a new
world, and I have found one.  Here are two chairs; let us sit down and
see the smart people go by."

They took their seats amidst a crowd of watchers.  The tulip-beds
across the road flamed like throbbing rings of fire.  A white
dust--tremulous cloud of orris-root it seemed--hung in the panting air.
The brightly coloured parasols danced and dipped like monstrous
butterflies.

She made her brother talk of himself, his hopes, his prospects.  He
spoke slowly and with effort.  They passed words to each other as
players at a game pass counters.  Sibyl felt oppressed.  She could not
communicate her joy.  A faint smile curving that sullen mouth was all
the echo she could win.  After some time she became silent.  Suddenly
she caught a glimpse of golden hair and laughing lips, and in an open
carriage with two ladies Dorian Gray drove past.

She started to her feet.  "There he is!" she cried.

"Who?" said Jim Vane.

"Prince Charming," she answered, looking after the victoria.

He jumped up and seized her roughly by the arm.  "Show him to me.
Which is he?  Point him out.  I must see him!" he exclaimed; but at
that moment the Duke of Berwick's four-in-hand came between, and when
it had left the space clear, the carriage had swept out of the park.

"He is gone," murmured Sibyl sadly.  "I wish you had seen him."

"I wish I had, for as sure as there is a God in heaven, if he ever does
you any wrong, I shall kill him."

She looked at him in horror.  He repeated his words.  They cut the air
like a dagger.  The people round began to gape.  A lady standing close
to her tittered.

"Come away, Jim; come away," she whispered.  He followed her doggedly
as she passed through the crowd.  He felt glad at what he had said.

When they reached the Achilles Statue, she turned round.  There was
pity in her eyes that became laughter on her lips.  She shook her head
at him.  "You are foolish, Jim, utterly foolish; a bad-tempered boy,
that is all.  How can you say such horrible things?  You don't know
what you are talking about.  You are simply jealous and unkind.  Ah!  I
wish you would fall in love.  Love makes people good, and what you said
was wicked."

"I am sixteen," he answered, "and I know what I am about.  Mother is no
help to you.  She doesn't understand how to look after you.  I wish now
that I was not going to Australia at all.  I have a great mind to chuck
the whole thing up.  I would, if my articles hadn't been signed."

"Oh, don't be so serious, Jim.  You are like one of the heroes of those
silly melodramas Mother used to be so fond of acting in.  I am not
going to quarrel with you.  I have seen him, and oh! to see him is
perfect happiness.  We won't quarrel.  I know you would never harm any
one I love, would you?"

"Not as long as you love him, I suppose," was the sullen answer.

"I shall love him for ever!" she cried.

"And he?"

"For ever, too!"

"He had better."

She shrank from him.  Then she laughed and put her hand on his arm.  He
was merely a boy.

At the Marble Arch they hailed an omnibus, which left them close to
their shabby home in the Euston Road.  It was after five o'clock, and
Sibyl had to lie down for a couple of hours before acting.  Jim
insisted that she should do so.  He said that he would sooner part with
her when their mother was not present.  She would be sure to make a
scene, and he detested scenes of every kind.

In Sybil's own room they parted.  There was jealousy in the lad's
heart, and a fierce murderous hatred of the stranger who, as it seemed
to him, had come between them.  Yet, when her arms were flung round his
neck, and her fingers strayed through his hair, he softened and kissed
her with real affection.  There were tears in his eyes as he went
downstairs.

His mother was waiting for him below.  She grumbled at his
unpunctuality, as he entered.  He made no answer, but sat down to his
meagre meal.  The flies buzzed round the table and crawled over the
stained cloth.  Through the rumble of omnibuses, and the clatter of
street-cabs, he could hear the droning voice devouring each minute that
was left to him.

After some time, he thrust away his plate and put his head in his
hands.  He felt that he had a right to know.  It should have been told
to him before, if it was as he suspected.  Leaden with fear, his mother
watched him.  Words dropped mechanically from her lips.  A tattered
lace handkerchief twitched in her fingers.  When the clock struck six,
he got up and went to the door.  Then he turned back and looked at her.
Their eyes met.  In hers he saw a wild appeal for mercy.  It enraged
him.

"Mother, I have something to ask you," he said.  Her eyes wandered
vaguely about the room.  She made no answer.  "Tell me the truth.  I
have a right to know.  Were you married to my father?"

She heaved a deep sigh.  It was a sigh of relief.  The terrible moment,
the moment that night and day, for weeks and months, she had dreaded,
had come at last, and yet she felt no terror.  Indeed, in some measure
it was a disappointment to her.  The vulgar directness of the question
called for a direct answer.  The situation had not been gradually led
up to.  It was crude.  It reminded her of a bad rehearsal.

"No," she answered, wondering at the harsh simplicity of life.

"My father was a scoundrel then!" cried the lad, clenching his fists.

She shook her head.  "I knew he was not free.  We loved each other very
much.  If he had lived, he would have made provision for us.  Don't
speak against him, my son.  He was your father, and a gentleman.
Indeed, he was highly connected."

An oath broke from his lips.  "I don't care for myself," he exclaimed,
"but don't let Sibyl.... It is a gentleman, isn't it, who is in love
with her, or says he is?  Highly connected, too, I suppose."

For a moment a hideous sense of humiliation came over the woman.  Her
head drooped.  She wiped her eyes with shaking hands.  "Sibyl has a
mother," she murmured; "I had none."

The lad was touched.  He went towards her, and stooping down, he kissed
her.  "I am sorry if I have pained you by asking about my father," he
said, "but I could not help it.  I must go now.  Good-bye. Don't forget
that you will have only one child now to look after, and believe me
that if this man wrongs my sister, I will find out who he is, track him
down, and kill him like a dog.  I swear it."

The exaggerated folly of the threat, the passionate gesture that
accompanied it, the mad melodramatic words, made life seem more vivid
to her.  She was familiar with the atmosphere.  She breathed more
freely, and for the first time for many months she really admired her
son.  She would have liked to have continued the scene on the same
emotional scale, but he cut her short.  Trunks had to be carried down
and mufflers looked for.  The lodging-house drudge bustled in and out.
There was the bargaining with the cabman.  The moment was lost in
vulgar details.  It was with a renewed feeling of disappointment that
she waved the tattered lace handkerchief from the window, as her son
drove away.  She was conscious that a great opportunity had been
wasted.  She consoled herself by telling Sibyl how desolate she felt
her life would be, now that she had only one child to look after.  She
remembered the phrase.  It had pleased her.  Of the threat she said
nothing.  It was vividly and dramatically expressed.  She felt that
they would all laugh at it some day.





"I suppose you have heard the news, Basil?" said Lord Henry that
evening as Hallward was shown into a little private room at the Bristol
where dinner had been laid for three.

"No, Harry," answered the artist, giving his hat and coat to the bowing
waiter.  "What is it?  Nothing about politics, I hope!  They don't
interest me.  There is hardly a single person in the House of Commons
worth painting, though many of them would be the better for a little
whitewashing."

"Dorian Gray is engaged to be married," said Lord Henry, watching him
as he spoke.

Hallward started and then frowned.  "Dorian engaged to be married!" he
cried.  "Impossible!"

"It is perfectly true."

"To whom?"

"To some little actress or other."

"I can't believe it.  Dorian is far too sensible."

"Dorian is far too wise not to do foolish things now and then, my dear
Basil."

"Marriage is hardly a thing that one can do now and then, Harry."

"Except in America," rejoined Lord Henry languidly.  "But I didn't say
he was married.  I said he was engaged to be married.  There is a great
difference.  I have a distinct remembrance of being married, but I have
no recollection at all of being engaged.  I am inclined to think that I
never was engaged."

"But think of Dorian's birth, and position, and wealth.  It would be
absurd for him to marry so much beneath him."

"If you want to make him marry this girl, tell him that, Basil.  He is
sure to do it, then.  Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it
is always from the noblest motives."

"I hope the girl is good, Harry.  I don't want to see Dorian tied to
some vile creature, who might degrade his nature and ruin his
intellect."

"Oh, she is better than good--she is beautiful," murmured Lord Henry,
sipping a glass of vermouth and orange-bitters. "Dorian says she is
beautiful, and he is not often wrong about things of that kind.  Your
portrait of him has quickened his appreciation of the personal
appearance of other people.  It has had that excellent effect, amongst
others.  We are to see her to-night, if that boy doesn't forget his
appointment."

"Are you serious?"

"Quite serious, Basil.  I should be miserable if I thought I should
ever be more serious than I am at the present moment."

"But do you approve of it, Harry?" asked the painter, walking up and
down the room and biting his lip.  "You can't approve of it, possibly.
It is some silly infatuation."

"I never approve, or disapprove, of anything now.  It is an absurd
attitude to take towards life.  We are not sent into the world to air
our moral prejudices.  I never take any notice of what common people
say, and I never interfere with what charming people do.  If a
personality fascinates me, whatever mode of expression that personality
selects is absolutely delightful to me.  Dorian Gray falls in love with
a beautiful girl who acts Juliet, and proposes to marry her.  Why not?
If he wedded Messalina, he would be none the less interesting.  You
know I am not a champion of marriage.  The real drawback to marriage is
that it makes one unselfish.  And unselfish people are colourless.
They lack individuality.  Still, there are certain temperaments that
marriage makes more complex.  They retain their egotism, and add to it
many other egos.  They are forced to have more than one life.  They
become more highly organized, and to be highly organized is, I should
fancy, the object of man's existence.  Besides, every experience is of
value, and whatever one may say against marriage, it is certainly an
experience.  I hope that Dorian Gray will make this girl his wife,
passionately adore her for six months, and then suddenly become
fascinated by some one else.  He would be a wonderful study."

"You don't mean a single word of all that, Harry; you know you don't.
If Dorian Gray's life were spoiled, no one would be sorrier than
yourself.  You are much better than you pretend to be."

Lord Henry laughed.  "The reason we all like to think so well of others
is that we are all afraid for ourselves.  The basis of optimism is
sheer terror.  We think that we are generous because we credit our
neighbour with the possession of those virtues that are likely to be a
benefit to us.  We praise the banker that we may overdraw our account,
and find good qualities in the highwayman in the hope that he may spare
our pockets.  I mean everything that I have said.  I have the greatest
contempt for optimism.  As for a spoiled life, no life is spoiled but
one whose growth is arrested.  If you want to mar a nature, you have
merely to reform it.  As for marriage, of course that would be silly,
but there are other and more interesting bonds between men and women.
I will certainly encourage them.  They have the charm of being
fashionable.  But here is Dorian himself.  He will tell you more than I
can."

"My dear Harry, my dear Basil, you must both congratulate me!" said the
lad, throwing off his evening cape with its satin-lined wings and
shaking each of his friends by the hand in turn.  "I have never been so
happy.  Of course, it is sudden--all really delightful things are.  And
yet it seems to me to be the one thing I have been looking for all my
life." He was flushed with excitement and pleasure, and looked
extraordinarily handsome.

"I hope you will always be very happy, Dorian," said Hallward, "but I
don't quite forgive you for not having let me know of your engagement.
You let Harry know."

"And I don't forgive you for being late for dinner," broke in Lord
Henry, putting his hand on the lad's shoulder and smiling as he spoke.
"Come, let us sit down and try what the new _chef_ here is like, and then
you will tell us how it all came about."

"There is really not much to tell," cried Dorian as they took their
seats at the small round table.  "What happened was simply this.  After
I left you yesterday evening, Harry, I dressed, had some dinner at that
little Italian restaurant in Rupert Street you introduced me to, and
went down at eight o'clock to the theatre.  Sibyl was playing Rosalind.
Of course, the scenery was dreadful and the Orlando absurd.  But Sibyl!
You should have seen her!  When she came on in her boy's clothes, she
was perfectly wonderful.  She wore a moss-coloured velvet jerkin with
cinnamon sleeves, slim, brown, cross-gartered hose, a dainty little
green cap with a hawk's feather caught in a jewel, and a hooded cloak
lined with dull red.  She had never seemed to me more exquisite.  She
had all the delicate grace of that Tanagra figurine that you have in
your studio, Basil.  Her hair clustered round her face like dark leaves
round a pale rose.  As for her acting--well, you shall see her
to-night. She is simply a born artist.  I sat in the dingy box
absolutely enthralled.  I forgot that I was in London and in the
nineteenth century.  I was away with my love in a forest that no man
had ever seen.  After the performance was over, I went behind and spoke
to her.  As we were sitting together, suddenly there came into her eyes
a look that I had never seen there before.  My lips moved towards hers.
We kissed each other.  I can't describe to you what I felt at that
moment.  It seemed to me that all my life had been narrowed to one
perfect point of rose-coloured joy.  She trembled all over and shook
like a white narcissus.  Then she flung herself on her knees and kissed
my hands.  I feel that I should not tell you all this, but I can't help
it.  Of course, our engagement is a dead secret.  She has not even told
her own mother.  I don't know what my guardians will say.  Lord Radley
is sure to be furious.  I don't care.  I shall be of age in less than a
year, and then I can do what I like.  I have been right, Basil, haven't
I, to take my love out of poetry and to find my wife in Shakespeare's
plays?  Lips that Shakespeare taught to speak have whispered their
secret in my ear.  I have had the arms of Rosalind around me, and
kissed Juliet on the mouth."

"Yes, Dorian, I suppose you were right," said Hallward slowly.

"Have you seen her to-day?" asked Lord Henry.

Dorian Gray shook his head.  "I left her in the forest of Arden; I
shall find her in an orchard in Verona."

Lord Henry sipped his champagne in a meditative manner.  "At what
particular point did you mention the word marriage, Dorian?  And what
did she say in answer?  Perhaps you forgot all about it."

"My dear Harry, I did not treat it as a business transaction, and I did
not make any formal proposal.  I told her that I loved her, and she
said she was not worthy to be my wife.  Not worthy!  Why, the whole
world is nothing to me compared with her."

"Women are wonderfully practical," murmured Lord Henry, "much more
practical than we are.  In situations of that kind we often forget to
say anything about marriage, and they always remind us."

Hallward laid his hand upon his arm.  "Don't, Harry.  You have annoyed
Dorian.  He is not like other men.  He would never bring misery upon
any one.  His nature is too fine for that."

Lord Henry looked across the table.  "Dorian is never annoyed with me,"
he answered.  "I asked the question for the best reason possible, for
the only reason, indeed, that excuses one for asking any
question--simple curiosity.  I have a theory that it is always the
women who propose to us, and not we who propose to the women.  Except,
of course, in middle-class life.  But then the middle classes are not
modern."

Dorian Gray laughed, and tossed his head.  "You are quite incorrigible,
Harry; but I don't mind.  It is impossible to be angry with you.  When
you see Sibyl Vane, you will feel that the man who could wrong her
would be a beast, a beast without a heart.  I cannot understand how any
one can wish to shame the thing he loves.  I love Sibyl Vane.  I want
to place her on a pedestal of gold and to see the world worship the
woman who is mine.  What is marriage?  An irrevocable vow.  You mock at
it for that.  Ah! don't mock.  It is an irrevocable vow that I want to
take.  Her trust makes me faithful, her belief makes me good.  When I
am with her, I regret all that you have taught me.  I become different
from what you have known me to be.  I am changed, and the mere touch of
Sibyl Vane's hand makes me forget you and all your wrong, fascinating,
poisonous, delightful theories."

"And those are ...?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad.

"Oh, your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories
about pleasure.  All your theories, in fact, Harry."

"Pleasure is the only thing worth having a theory about," he answered
in his slow melodious voice.  "But I am afraid I cannot claim my theory
as my own.  It belongs to Nature, not to me.  Pleasure is Nature's
test, her sign of approval.  When we are happy, we are always good, but
when we are good, we are not always happy."

"Ah! but what do you mean by good?" cried Basil Hallward.

"Yes," echoed Dorian, leaning back in his chair and looking at Lord
Henry over the heavy clusters of purple-lipped irises that stood in the
centre of the table, "what do you mean by good, Harry?"

"To be good is to be in harmony with one's self," he replied, touching
the thin stem of his glass with his pale, fine-pointed fingers.
"Discord is to be forced to be in harmony with others.  One's own
life--that is the important thing.  As for the lives of one's
neighbours, if one wishes to be a prig or a Puritan, one can flaunt
one's moral views about them, but they are not one's concern.  Besides,
individualism has really the higher aim.  Modern morality consists in
accepting the standard of one's age.  I consider that for any man of
culture to accept the standard of his age is a form of the grossest
immorality."

"But, surely, if one lives merely for one's self, Harry, one pays a
terrible price for doing so?" suggested the painter.

"Yes, we are overcharged for everything nowadays.  I should fancy that
the real tragedy of the poor is that they can afford nothing but
self-denial. Beautiful sins, like beautiful things, are the privilege
of the rich."

"One has to pay in other ways but money."

"What sort of ways, Basil?"

"Oh!  I should fancy in remorse, in suffering, in ... well, in the
consciousness of degradation."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "My dear fellow, mediaeval art is
charming, but mediaeval emotions are out of date.  One can use them in
fiction, of course.  But then the only things that one can use in
fiction are the things that one has ceased to use in fact.  Believe me,
no civilized man ever regrets a pleasure, and no uncivilized man ever
knows what a pleasure is."

"I know what pleasure is," cried Dorian Gray.  "It is to adore some
one."

"That is certainly better than being adored," he answered, toying with
some fruits.  "Being adored is a nuisance.  Women treat us just as
humanity treats its gods.  They worship us, and are always bothering us
to do something for them."

"I should have said that whatever they ask for they had first given to
us," murmured the lad gravely.  "They create love in our natures.  They
have a right to demand it back."

"That is quite true, Dorian," cried Hallward.

"Nothing is ever quite true," said Lord Henry.

"This is," interrupted Dorian.  "You must admit, Harry, that women give
to men the very gold of their lives."

"Possibly," he sighed, "but they invariably want it back in such very
small change.  That is the worry.  Women, as some witty Frenchman once
put it, inspire us with the desire to do masterpieces and always
prevent us from carrying them out."

"Harry, you are dreadful!  I don't know why I like you so much."

"You will always like me, Dorian," he replied.  "Will you have some
coffee, you fellows?  Waiter, bring coffee, and _fine-champagne_, and
some cigarettes.  No, don't mind the cigarettes--I have some.  Basil, I
can't allow you to smoke cigars.  You must have a cigarette.  A
cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure.  It is exquisite,
and it leaves one unsatisfied.  What more can one want?  Yes, Dorian,
you will always be fond of me.  I represent to you all the sins you
have never had the courage to commit."

"What nonsense you talk, Harry!" cried the lad, taking a light from a
fire-breathing silver dragon that the waiter had placed on the table.
"Let us go down to the theatre.  When Sibyl comes on the stage you will
have a new ideal of life.  She will represent something to you that you
have never known."

"I have known everything," said Lord Henry, with a tired look in his
eyes, "but I am always ready for a new emotion.  I am afraid, however,
that, for me at any rate, there is no such thing.  Still, your
wonderful girl may thrill me.  I love acting.  It is so much more real
than life.  Let us go.  Dorian, you will come with me.  I am so sorry,
Basil, but there is only room for two in the brougham.  You must follow
us in a hansom."

They got up and put on their coats, sipping their coffee standing.  The
painter was silent and preoccupied.  There was a gloom over him.  He
could not bear this marriage, and yet it seemed to him to be better
than many other things that might have happened.  After a few minutes,
they all passed downstairs.  He drove off by himself, as had been
arranged, and watched the flashing lights of the little brougham in
front of him.  A strange sense of loss came over him.  He felt that
Dorian Gray would never again be to him all that he had been in the
past.  Life had come between them.... His eyes darkened, and the
crowded flaring streets became blurred to his eyes.  When the cab drew
up at the theatre, it seemed to him that he had grown years older.





For some reason or other, the house was crowded that night, and the fat
Jew manager who met them at the door was beaming from ear to ear with
an oily tremulous smile.  He escorted them to their box with a sort of
pompous humility, waving his fat jewelled hands and talking at the top
of his voice.  Dorian Gray loathed him more than ever.  He felt as if
he had come to look for Miranda and had been met by Caliban.  Lord
Henry, upon the other hand, rather liked him.  At least he declared he
did, and insisted on shaking him by the hand and assuring him that he
was proud to meet a man who had discovered a real genius and gone
bankrupt over a poet.  Hallward amused himself with watching the faces
in the pit.  The heat was terribly oppressive, and the huge sunlight
flamed like a monstrous dahlia with petals of yellow fire.  The youths
in the gallery had taken off their coats and waistcoats and hung them
over the side.  They talked to each other across the theatre and shared
their oranges with the tawdry girls who sat beside them.  Some women
were laughing in the pit.  Their voices were horribly shrill and
discordant.  The sound of the popping of corks came from the bar.

"What a place to find one's divinity in!" said Lord Henry.

"Yes!" answered Dorian Gray.  "It was here I found her, and she is
divine beyond all living things.  When she acts, you will forget
everything.  These common rough people, with their coarse faces and
brutal gestures, become quite different when she is on the stage.  They
sit silently and watch her.  They weep and laugh as she wills them to
do.  She makes them as responsive as a violin.  She spiritualizes them,
and one feels that they are of the same flesh and blood as one's self."

"The same flesh and blood as one's self!  Oh, I hope not!" exclaimed
Lord Henry, who was scanning the occupants of the gallery through his
opera-glass.

"Don't pay any attention to him, Dorian," said the painter.  "I
understand what you mean, and I believe in this girl.  Any one you love
must be marvellous, and any girl who has the effect you describe must
be fine and noble.  To spiritualize one's age--that is something worth
doing.  If this girl can give a soul to those who have lived without
one, if she can create the sense of beauty in people whose lives have
been sordid and ugly, if she can strip them of their selfishness and
lend them tears for sorrows that are not their own, she is worthy of
all your adoration, worthy of the adoration of the world.  This
marriage is quite right.  I did not think so at first, but I admit it
now.  The gods made Sibyl Vane for you.  Without her you would have
been incomplete."

"Thanks, Basil," answered Dorian Gray, pressing his hand.  "I knew that
you would understand me.  Harry is so cynical, he terrifies me.  But
here is the orchestra.  It is quite dreadful, but it only lasts for
about five minutes.  Then the curtain rises, and you will see the girl
to whom I am going to give all my life, to whom I have given everything
that is good in me."

A quarter of an hour afterwards, amidst an extraordinary turmoil of
applause, Sibyl Vane stepped on to the stage.  Yes, she was certainly
lovely to look at--one of the loveliest creatures, Lord Henry thought,
that he had ever seen.  There was something of the fawn in her shy
grace and startled eyes.  A faint blush, like the shadow of a rose in a
mirror of silver, came to her cheeks as she glanced at the crowded
enthusiastic house.  She stepped back a few paces and her lips seemed
to tremble.  Basil Hallward leaped to his feet and began to applaud.
Motionless, and as one in a dream, sat Dorian Gray, gazing at her.
Lord Henry peered through his glasses, murmuring, "Charming! charming!"

The scene was the hall of Capulet's house, and Romeo in his pilgrim's
dress had entered with Mercutio and his other friends.  The band, such
as it was, struck up a few bars of music, and the dance began.  Through
the crowd of ungainly, shabbily dressed actors, Sibyl Vane moved like a
creature from a finer world.  Her body swayed, while she danced, as a
plant sways in the water.  The curves of her throat were the curves of
a white lily.  Her hands seemed to be made of cool ivory.

Yet she was curiously listless.  She showed no sign of joy when her
eyes rested on Romeo.  The few words she had to speak--

    Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
        Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
    For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
        And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss--

with the brief dialogue that follows, were spoken in a thoroughly
artificial manner.  The voice was exquisite, but from the point of view
of tone it was absolutely false.  It was wrong in colour.  It took away
all the life from the verse.  It made the passion unreal.

Dorian Gray grew pale as he watched her.  He was puzzled and anxious.
Neither of his friends dared to say anything to him.  She seemed to
them to be absolutely incompetent.  They were horribly disappointed.

Yet they felt that the true test of any Juliet is the balcony scene of
the second act.  They waited for that.  If she failed there, there was
nothing in her.

She looked charming as she came out in the moonlight.  That could not
be denied.  But the staginess of her acting was unbearable, and grew
worse as she went on.  Her gestures became absurdly artificial.  She
overemphasized everything that she had to say.  The beautiful passage--

    Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
    Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
    For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night--

was declaimed with the painful precision of a schoolgirl who has been
taught to recite by some second-rate professor of elocution. When she
leaned over the balcony and came to those wonderful lines--

        Although I joy in thee,
    I have no joy of this contract to-night:
    It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
    Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
    Ere one can say, "It lightens."  Sweet, good-night!
    This bud of love by summer's ripening breath
    May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet--

she spoke the words as though they conveyed no meaning to her. It was
not nervousness. Indeed, so far from being nervous, she was absolutely
self-contained. It was simply bad art. She was a complete failure.

Even the common uneducated audience of the pit and gallery lost their
interest in the play. They got restless, and began to talk loudly and
to whistle. The Jew manager, who was standing at the back of the
dress-circle, stamped and swore with rage. The only person unmoved was
the girl herself.

When the second act was over, there came a storm of hisses, and Lord
Henry got up from his chair and put on his coat.  "She is quite
beautiful, Dorian," he said, "but she can't act.  Let us go."

"I am going to see the play through," answered the lad, in a hard
bitter voice.  "I am awfully sorry that I have made you waste an
evening, Harry.  I apologize to you both."

"My dear Dorian, I should think Miss Vane was ill," interrupted
Hallward.  "We will come some other night."

"I wish she were ill," he rejoined.  "But she seems to me to be simply
callous and cold.  She has entirely altered.  Last night she was a
great artist.  This evening she is merely a commonplace mediocre
actress."

"Don't talk like that about any one you love, Dorian.  Love is a more
wonderful thing than art."

"They are both simply forms of imitation," remarked Lord Henry.  "But
do let us go.  Dorian, you must not stay here any longer.  It is not
good for one's morals to see bad acting.  Besides, I don't suppose you
will want your wife to act, so what does it matter if she plays Juliet
like a wooden doll?  She is very lovely, and if she knows as little
about life as she does about acting, she will be a delightful
experience.  There are only two kinds of people who are really
fascinating--people who know absolutely everything, and people who know
absolutely nothing.  Good heavens, my dear boy, don't look so tragic!
The secret of remaining young is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.  Come to the club with Basil and myself.  We will smoke
cigarettes and drink to the beauty of Sibyl Vane.  She is beautiful.
What more can you want?"

"Go away, Harry," cried the lad.  "I want to be alone.  Basil, you must
go.  Ah! can't you see that my heart is breaking?"  The hot tears came
to his eyes.  His lips trembled, and rushing to the back of the box, he
leaned up against the wall, hiding his face in his hands.

"Let us go, Basil," said Lord Henry with a strange tenderness in his
voice, and the two young men passed out together.

A few moments afterwards the footlights flared up and the curtain rose
on the third act.  Dorian Gray went back to his seat.  He looked pale,
and proud, and indifferent.  The play dragged on, and seemed
interminable.  Half of the audience went out, tramping in heavy boots
and laughing.  The whole thing was a _fiasco_.  The last act was played
to almost empty benches.  The curtain went down on a titter and some
groans.

As soon as it was over, Dorian Gray rushed behind the scenes into the
greenroom.  The girl was standing there alone, with a look of triumph
on her face.  Her eyes were lit with an exquisite fire.  There was a
radiance about her.  Her parted lips were smiling over some secret of
their own.

When he entered, she looked at him, and an expression of infinite joy
came over her.  "How badly I acted to-night, Dorian!" she cried.

"Horribly!" he answered, gazing at her in amazement.  "Horribly!  It
was dreadful.  Are you ill?  You have no idea what it was.  You have no
idea what I suffered."

The girl smiled.  "Dorian," she answered, lingering over his name with
long-drawn music in her voice, as though it were sweeter than honey to
the red petals of her mouth.  "Dorian, you should have understood.  But
you understand now, don't you?"

"Understand what?" he asked, angrily.

"Why I was so bad to-night. Why I shall always be bad.  Why I shall
never act well again."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "You are ill, I suppose.  When you are ill
you shouldn't act.  You make yourself ridiculous.  My friends were
bored.  I was bored."

She seemed not to listen to him.  She was transfigured with joy.  An
ecstasy of happiness dominated her.

"Dorian, Dorian," she cried, "before I knew you, acting was the one
reality of my life.  It was only in the theatre that I lived.  I
thought that it was all true.  I was Rosalind one night and Portia the
other.  The joy of Beatrice was my joy, and the sorrows of Cordelia
were mine also.  I believed in everything.  The common people who acted
with me seemed to me to be godlike.  The painted scenes were my world.
I knew nothing but shadows, and I thought them real.  You came--oh, my
beautiful love!--and you freed my soul from prison.  You taught me what
reality really is.  To-night, for the first time in my life, I saw
through the hollowness, the sham, the silliness of the empty pageant in
which I had always played.  To-night, for the first time, I became
conscious that the Romeo was hideous, and old, and painted, that the
moonlight in the orchard was false, that the scenery was vulgar, and
that the words I had to speak were unreal, were not my words, were not
what I wanted to say.  You had brought me something higher, something
of which all art is but a reflection.  You had made me understand what
love really is.  My love!  My love!  Prince Charming!  Prince of life!
I have grown sick of shadows.  You are more to me than all art can ever
be.  What have I to do with the puppets of a play?  When I came on
to-night, I could not understand how it was that everything had gone
from me.  I thought that I was going to be wonderful.  I found that I
could do nothing.  Suddenly it dawned on my soul what it all meant.
The knowledge was exquisite to me.  I heard them hissing, and I smiled.
What could they know of love such as ours?  Take me away, Dorian--take
me away with you, where we can be quite alone.  I hate the stage.  I
might mimic a passion that I do not feel, but I cannot mimic one that
burns me like fire.  Oh, Dorian, Dorian, you understand now what it
signifies?  Even if I could do it, it would be profanation for me to
play at being in love.  You have made me see that."

He flung himself down on the sofa and turned away his face.  "You have
killed my love," he muttered.

She looked at him in wonder and laughed.  He made no answer.  She came
across to him, and with her little fingers stroked his hair.  She knelt
down and pressed his hands to her lips.  He drew them away, and a
shudder ran through him.

Then he leaped up and went to the door.  "Yes," he cried, "you have
killed my love.  You used to stir my imagination.  Now you don't even
stir my curiosity.  You simply produce no effect.  I loved you because
you were marvellous, because you had genius and intellect, because you
realized the dreams of great poets and gave shape and substance to the
shadows of art.  You have thrown it all away.  You are shallow and
stupid.  My God! how mad I was to love you!  What a fool I have been!
You are nothing to me now.  I will never see you again.  I will never
think of you.  I will never mention your name.  You don't know what you
were to me, once.  Why, once ... Oh, I can't bear to think of it!  I
wish I had never laid eyes upon you!  You have spoiled the romance of
my life.  How little you can know of love, if you say it mars your art!
Without your art, you are nothing.  I would have made you famous,
splendid, magnificent.  The world would have worshipped you, and you
would have borne my name.  What are you now?  A third-rate actress with
a pretty face."

The girl grew white, and trembled.  She clenched her hands together,
and her voice seemed to catch in her throat.  "You are not serious,
Dorian?" she murmured.  "You are acting."

"Acting!  I leave that to you.  You do it so well," he answered
bitterly.

She rose from her knees and, with a piteous expression of pain in her
face, came across the room to him.  She put her hand upon his arm and
looked into his eyes.  He thrust her back.  "Don't touch me!" he cried.

A low moan broke from her, and she flung herself at his feet and lay
there like a trampled flower.  "Dorian, Dorian, don't leave me!" she
whispered.  "I am so sorry I didn't act well.  I was thinking of you
all the time.  But I will try--indeed, I will try.  It came so suddenly
across me, my love for you.  I think I should never have known it if
you had not kissed me--if we had not kissed each other.  Kiss me again,
my love.  Don't go away from me.  I couldn't bear it.  Oh! don't go
away from me.  My brother ... No; never mind.  He didn't mean it.  He
was in jest.... But you, oh! can't you forgive me for to-night? I will
work so hard and try to improve.  Don't be cruel to me, because I love
you better than anything in the world.  After all, it is only once that
I have not pleased you.  But you are quite right, Dorian.  I should
have shown myself more of an artist.  It was foolish of me, and yet I
couldn't help it.  Oh, don't leave me, don't leave me." A fit of
passionate sobbing choked her.  She crouched on the floor like a
wounded thing, and Dorian Gray, with his beautiful eyes, looked down at
her, and his chiselled lips curled in exquisite disdain.  There is
always something ridiculous about the emotions of people whom one has
ceased to love.  Sibyl Vane seemed to him to be absurdly melodramatic.
Her tears and sobs annoyed him.

"I am going," he said at last in his calm clear voice.  "I don't wish
to be unkind, but I can't see you again.  You have disappointed me."

She wept silently, and made no answer, but crept nearer.  Her little
hands stretched blindly out, and appeared to be seeking for him.  He
turned on his heel and left the room.  In a few moments he was out of
the theatre.

Where he went to he hardly knew.  He remembered wandering through dimly
lit streets, past gaunt, black-shadowed archways and evil-looking
houses.  Women with hoarse voices and harsh laughter had called after
him.  Drunkards had reeled by, cursing and chattering to themselves
like monstrous apes.  He had seen grotesque children huddled upon
door-steps, and heard shrieks and oaths from gloomy courts.

As the dawn was just breaking, he found himself close to Covent Garden.
The darkness lifted, and, flushed with faint fires, the sky hollowed
itself into a perfect pearl.  Huge carts filled with nodding lilies
rumbled slowly down the polished empty street.  The air was heavy with
the perfume of the flowers, and their beauty seemed to bring him an
anodyne for his pain.  He followed into the market and watched the men
unloading their waggons.  A white-smocked carter offered him some
cherries.  He thanked him, wondered why he refused to accept any money
for them, and began to eat them listlessly.  They had been plucked at
midnight, and the coldness of the moon had entered into them.  A long
line of boys carrying crates of striped tulips, and of yellow and red
roses, defiled in front of him, threading their way through the huge,
jade-green piles of vegetables.  Under the portico, with its grey,
sun-bleached pillars, loitered a troop of draggled bareheaded girls,
waiting for the auction to be over.  Others crowded round the swinging
doors of the coffee-house in the piazza.  The heavy cart-horses slipped
and stamped upon the rough stones, shaking their bells and trappings.
Some of the drivers were lying asleep on a pile of sacks.  Iris-necked
and pink-footed, the pigeons ran about picking up seeds.

After a little while, he hailed a hansom and drove home.  For a few
moments he loitered upon the doorstep, looking round at the silent
square, with its blank, close-shuttered windows and its staring blinds.
The sky was pure opal now, and the roofs of the houses glistened like
silver against it.  From some chimney opposite a thin wreath of smoke
was rising.  It curled, a violet riband, through the nacre-coloured air.

In the huge gilt Venetian lantern, spoil of some Doge's barge, that
hung from the ceiling of the great, oak-panelled hall of entrance,
lights were still burning from three flickering jets: thin blue petals
of flame they seemed, rimmed with white fire.  He turned them out and,
having thrown his hat and cape on the table, passed through the library
towards the door of his bedroom, a large octagonal chamber on the
ground floor that, in his new-born feeling for luxury, he had just had
decorated for himself and hung with some curious Renaissance tapestries
that had been discovered stored in a disused attic at Selby Royal.  As
he was turning the handle of the door, his eye fell upon the portrait
Basil Hallward had painted of him.  He started back as if in surprise.
Then he went on into his own room, looking somewhat puzzled.  After he
had taken the button-hole out of his coat, he seemed to hesitate.
Finally, he came back, went over to the picture, and examined it.  In
the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk
blinds, the face appeared to him to be a little changed.  The
expression looked different.  One would have said that there was a
touch of cruelty in the mouth.  It was certainly strange.

He turned round and, walking to the window, drew up the blind.  The
bright dawn flooded the room and swept the fantastic shadows into dusky
corners, where they lay shuddering.  But the strange expression that he
had noticed in the face of the portrait seemed to linger there, to be
more intensified even.  The quivering ardent sunlight showed him the
lines of cruelty round the mouth as clearly as if he had been looking
into a mirror after he had done some dreadful thing.

He winced and, taking up from the table an oval glass framed in ivory
Cupids, one of Lord Henry's many presents to him, glanced hurriedly
into its polished depths.  No line like that warped his red lips.  What
did it mean?

He rubbed his eyes, and came close to the picture, and examined it
again.  There were no signs of any change when he looked into the
actual painting, and yet there was no doubt that the whole expression
had altered.  It was not a mere fancy of his own.  The thing was
horribly apparent.

He threw himself into a chair and began to think.  Suddenly there
flashed across his mind what he had said in Basil Hallward's studio the
day the picture had been finished.  Yes, he remembered it perfectly.
He had uttered a mad wish that he himself might remain young, and the
portrait grow old; that his own beauty might be untarnished, and the
face on the canvas bear the burden of his passions and his sins; that
the painted image might be seared with the lines of suffering and
thought, and that he might keep all the delicate bloom and loveliness
of his then just conscious boyhood.  Surely his wish had not been
fulfilled?  Such things were impossible.  It seemed monstrous even to
think of them.  And, yet, there was the picture before him, with the
touch of cruelty in the mouth.

Cruelty!  Had he been cruel?  It was the girl's fault, not his.  He had
dreamed of her as a great artist, had given his love to her because he
had thought her great.  Then she had disappointed him.  She had been
shallow and unworthy.  And, yet, a feeling of infinite regret came over
him, as he thought of her lying at his feet sobbing like a little
child.  He remembered with what callousness he had watched her.  Why
had he been made like that?  Why had such a soul been given to him?
But he had suffered also.  During the three terrible hours that the
play had lasted, he had lived centuries of pain, aeon upon aeon of
torture.  His life was well worth hers.  She had marred him for a
moment, if he had wounded her for an age.  Besides, women were better
suited to bear sorrow than men.  They lived on their emotions.  They
only thought of their emotions.  When they took lovers, it was merely
to have some one with whom they could have scenes.  Lord Henry had told
him that, and Lord Henry knew what women were.  Why should he trouble
about Sibyl Vane?  She was nothing to him now.

But the picture?  What was he to say of that?  It held the secret of
his life, and told his story.  It had taught him to love his own
beauty.  Would it teach him to loathe his own soul?  Would he ever look
at it again?

No; it was merely an illusion wrought on the troubled senses.  The
horrible night that he had passed had left phantoms behind it.
Suddenly there had fallen upon his brain that tiny scarlet speck that
makes men mad.  The picture had not changed.  It was folly to think so.

Yet it was watching him, with its beautiful marred face and its cruel
smile.  Its bright hair gleamed in the early sunlight.  Its blue eyes
met his own.  A sense of infinite pity, not for himself, but for the
painted image of himself, came over him.  It had altered already, and
would alter more.  Its gold would wither into grey.  Its red and white
roses would die.  For every sin that he committed, a stain would fleck
and wreck its fairness.  But he would not sin.  The picture, changed or
unchanged, would be to him the visible emblem of conscience.  He would
resist temptation.  He would not see Lord Henry any more--would not, at
any rate, listen to those subtle poisonous theories that in Basil
Hallward's garden had first stirred within him the passion for
impossible things.  He would go back to Sibyl Vane, make her amends,
marry her, try to love her again.  Yes, it was his duty to do so.  She
must have suffered more than he had.  Poor child!  He had been selfish
and cruel to her.  The fascination that she had exercised over him
would return.  They would be happy together.  His life with her would
be beautiful and pure.

He got up from his chair and drew a large screen right in front of the
portrait, shuddering as he glanced at it.  "How horrible!" he murmured
to himself, and he walked across to the window and opened it.  When he
stepped out on to the grass, he drew a deep breath.  The fresh morning
air seemed to drive away all his sombre passions.  He thought only of
Sibyl.  A faint echo of his love came back to him.  He repeated her
name over and over again.  The birds that were singing in the
dew-drenched garden seemed to be telling the flowers about her.





It was long past noon when he awoke.  His valet had crept several times
on tiptoe into the room to see if he was stirring, and had wondered
what made his young master sleep so late.  Finally his bell sounded,
and Victor came in softly with a cup of tea, and a pile of letters, on
a small tray of old Sevres china, and drew back the olive-satin
curtains, with their shimmering blue lining, that hung in front of the
three tall windows.

"Monsieur has well slept this morning," he said, smiling.

"What o'clock is it, Victor?" asked Dorian Gray drowsily.

"One hour and a quarter, Monsieur."

How late it was!  He sat up, and having sipped some tea, turned over
his letters.  One of them was from Lord Henry, and had been brought by
hand that morning.  He hesitated for a moment, and then put it aside.
The others he opened listlessly.  They contained the usual collection
of cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes
of charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable
young men every morning during the season.  There was a rather heavy
bill for a chased silver Louis-Quinze toilet-set that he had not yet
had the courage to send on to his guardians, who were extremely
old-fashioned people and did not realize that we live in an age when
unnecessary things are our only necessities; and there were several
very courteously worded communications from Jermyn Street money-lenders
offering to advance any sum of money at a moment's notice and at the
most reasonable rates of interest.

After about ten minutes he got up, and throwing on an elaborate
dressing-gown of silk-embroidered cashmere wool, passed into the
onyx-paved bathroom.  The cool water refreshed him after his long
sleep.  He seemed to have forgotten all that he had gone through.  A
dim sense of having taken part in some strange tragedy came to him once
or twice, but there was the unreality of a dream about it.

As soon as he was dressed, he went into the library and sat down to a
light French breakfast that had been laid out for him on a small round
table close to the open window.  It was an exquisite day.  The warm air
seemed laden with spices.  A bee flew in and buzzed round the
blue-dragon bowl that, filled with sulphur-yellow roses, stood before
him.  He felt perfectly happy.

Suddenly his eye fell on the screen that he had placed in front of the
portrait, and he started.

"Too cold for Monsieur?" asked his valet, putting an omelette on the
table.  "I shut the window?"

Dorian shook his head.  "I am not cold," he murmured.

Was it all true?  Had the portrait really changed?  Or had it been
simply his own imagination that had made him see a look of evil where
there had been a look of joy?  Surely a painted canvas could not alter?
The thing was absurd.  It would serve as a tale to tell Basil some day.
It would make him smile.

And, yet, how vivid was his recollection of the whole thing!  First in
the dim twilight, and then in the bright dawn, he had seen the touch of
cruelty round the warped lips.  He almost dreaded his valet leaving the
room.  He knew that when he was alone he would have to examine the
portrait.  He was afraid of certainty.  When the coffee and cigarettes
had been brought and the man turned to go, he felt a wild desire to
tell him to remain.  As the door was closing behind him, he called him
back.  The man stood waiting for his orders.  Dorian looked at him for
a moment.  "I am not at home to any one, Victor," he said with a sigh.
The man bowed and retired.

Then he rose from the table, lit a cigarette, and flung himself down on
a luxuriously cushioned couch that stood facing the screen.  The screen
was an old one, of gilt Spanish leather, stamped and wrought with a
rather florid Louis-Quatorze pattern.  He scanned it curiously,
wondering if ever before it had concealed the secret of a man's life.

Should he move it aside, after all?  Why not let it stay there?  What
was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible.  If it
was not true, why trouble about it?  But what if, by some fate or
deadlier chance, eyes other than his spied behind and saw the horrible
change?  What should he do if Basil Hallward came and asked to look at
his own picture?  Basil would be sure to do that.  No; the thing had to
be examined, and at once.  Anything would be better than this dreadful
state of doubt.

He got up and locked both doors.  At least he would be alone when he
looked upon the mask of his shame.  Then he drew the screen aside and
saw himself face to face.  It was perfectly true.  The portrait had
altered.

As he often remembered afterwards, and always with no small wonder, he
found himself at first gazing at the portrait with a feeling of almost
scientific interest.  That such a change should have taken place was
incredible to him.  And yet it was a fact.  Was there some subtle
affinity between the chemical atoms that shaped themselves into form
and colour on the canvas and the soul that was within him?  Could it be
that what that soul thought, they realized?--that what it dreamed, they
made true?  Or was there some other, more terrible reason?  He
shuddered, and felt afraid, and, going back to the couch, lay there,
gazing at the picture in sickened horror.

One thing, however, he felt that it had done for him.  It had made him
conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.  It was not
too late to make reparation for that.  She could still be his wife.
His unreal and selfish love would yield to some higher influence, would
be transformed into some nobler passion, and the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him would be a guide to him through life, would
be to him what holiness is to some, and conscience to others, and the
fear of God to us all.  There were opiates for remorse, drugs that
could lull the moral sense to sleep.  But here was a visible symbol of
the degradation of sin.  Here was an ever-present sign of the ruin men
brought upon their souls.

Three o'clock struck, and four, and the half-hour rang its double
chime, but Dorian Gray did not stir.  He was trying to gather up the
scarlet threads of life and to weave them into a pattern; to find his
way through the sanguine labyrinth of passion through which he was
wandering.  He did not know what to do, or what to think.  Finally, he
went over to the table and wrote a passionate letter to the girl he had
loved, imploring her forgiveness and accusing himself of madness.  He
covered page after page with wild words of sorrow and wilder words of
pain.  There is a luxury in self-reproach. When we blame ourselves, we
feel that no one else has a right to blame us.  It is the confession,
not the priest, that gives us absolution.  When Dorian had finished the
letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

Suddenly there came a knock to the door, and he heard Lord Henry's
voice outside.  "My dear boy, I must see you.  Let me in at once.  I
can't bear your shutting yourself up like this."

He made no answer at first, but remained quite still.  The knocking
still continued and grew louder.  Yes, it was better to let Lord Henry
in, and to explain to him the new life he was going to lead, to quarrel
with him if it became necessary to quarrel, to part if parting was
inevitable.  He jumped up, drew the screen hastily across the picture,
and unlocked the door.

"I am so sorry for it all, Dorian," said Lord Henry as he entered.
"But you must not think too much about it."

"Do you mean about Sibyl Vane?" asked the lad.

"Yes, of course," answered Lord Henry, sinking into a chair and slowly
pulling off his yellow gloves.  "It is dreadful, from one point of
view, but it was not your fault.  Tell me, did you go behind and see
her, after the play was over?"

"Yes."

"I felt sure you had.  Did you make a scene with her?"

"I was brutal, Harry--perfectly brutal.  But it is all right now.  I am
not sorry for anything that has happened.  It has taught me to know
myself better."

"Ah, Dorian, I am so glad you take it in that way!  I was afraid I
would find you plunged in remorse and tearing that nice curly hair of
yours."

"I have got through all that," said Dorian, shaking his head and
smiling.  "I am perfectly happy now.  I know what conscience is, to
begin with.  It is not what you told me it was.  It is the divinest
thing in us.  Don't sneer at it, Harry, any more--at least not before
me.  I want to be good.  I can't bear the idea of my soul being
hideous."

"A very charming artistic basis for ethics, Dorian!  I congratulate you
on it.  But how are you going to begin?"

"By marrying Sibyl Vane."

"Marrying Sibyl Vane!" cried Lord Henry, standing up and looking at him
in perplexed amazement.  "But, my dear Dorian--"

"Yes, Harry, I know what you are going to say.  Something dreadful
about marriage.  Don't say it.  Don't ever say things of that kind to
me again.  Two days ago I asked Sibyl to marry me.  I am not going to
break my word to her.  She is to be my wife."

"Your wife!  Dorian! ... Didn't you get my letter?  I wrote to you this
morning, and sent the note down by my own man."

"Your letter?  Oh, yes, I remember.  I have not read it yet, Harry.  I
was afraid there might be something in it that I wouldn't like.  You
cut life to pieces with your epigrams."

"You know nothing then?"

"What do you mean?"

Lord Henry walked across the room, and sitting down by Dorian Gray,
took both his hands in his own and held them tightly.  "Dorian," he
said, "my letter--don't be frightened--was to tell you that Sibyl Vane
is dead."

A cry of pain broke from the lad's lips, and he leaped to his feet,
tearing his hands away from Lord Henry's grasp.  "Dead!  Sibyl dead!
It is not true!  It is a horrible lie!  How dare you say it?"

"It is quite true, Dorian," said Lord Henry, gravely.  "It is in all
the morning papers.  I wrote down to you to ask you not to see any one
till I came.  There will have to be an inquest, of course, and you must
not be mixed up in it.  Things like that make a man fashionable in
Paris.  But in London people are so prejudiced.  Here, one should never
make one's _debut_ with a scandal.  One should reserve that to give an
interest to one's old age.  I suppose they don't know your name at the
theatre?  If they don't, it is all right.  Did any one see you going
round to her room?  That is an important point."

Dorian did not answer for a few moments.  He was dazed with horror.
Finally he stammered, in a stifled voice, "Harry, did you say an
inquest?  What did you mean by that?  Did Sibyl--? Oh, Harry, I can't
bear it!  But be quick.  Tell me everything at once."

"I have no doubt it was not an accident, Dorian, though it must be put
in that way to the public.  It seems that as she was leaving the
theatre with her mother, about half-past twelve or so, she said she had
forgotten something upstairs.  They waited some time for her, but she
did not come down again.  They ultimately found her lying dead on the
floor of her dressing-room. She had swallowed something by mistake,
some dreadful thing they use at theatres.  I don't know what it was,
but it had either prussic acid or white lead in it.  I should fancy it
was prussic acid, as she seems to have died instantaneously."

"Harry, Harry, it is terrible!" cried the lad.

"Yes; it is very tragic, of course, but you must not get yourself mixed
up in it.  I see by _The Standard_ that she was seventeen.  I should have
thought she was almost younger than that.  She looked such a child, and
seemed to know so little about acting.  Dorian, you mustn't let this
thing get on your nerves.  You must come and dine with me, and
afterwards we will look in at the opera.  It is a Patti night, and
everybody will be there.  You can come to my sister's box.  She has got
some smart women with her."

"So I have murdered Sibyl Vane," said Dorian Gray, half to himself,
"murdered her as surely as if I had cut her little throat with a knife.
Yet the roses are not less lovely for all that.  The birds sing just as
happily in my garden.  And to-night I am to dine with you, and then go
on to the opera, and sup somewhere, I suppose, afterwards.  How
extraordinarily dramatic life is!  If I had read all this in a book,
Harry, I think I would have wept over it.  Somehow, now that it has
happened actually, and to me, it seems far too wonderful for tears.
Here is the first passionate love-letter I have ever written in my
life.  Strange, that my first passionate love-letter should have been
addressed to a dead girl.  Can they feel, I wonder, those white silent
people we call the dead?  Sibyl!  Can she feel, or know, or listen?
Oh, Harry, how I loved her once!  It seems years ago to me now.  She
was everything to me.  Then came that dreadful night--was it really
only last night?--when she played so badly, and my heart almost broke.
She explained it all to me.  It was terribly pathetic.  But I was not
moved a bit.  I thought her shallow.  Suddenly something happened that
made me afraid.  I can't tell you what it was, but it was terrible.  I
said I would go back to her.  I felt I had done wrong.  And now she is
dead.  My God!  My God!  Harry, what shall I do?  You don't know the
danger I am in, and there is nothing to keep me straight.  She would
have done that for me.  She had no right to kill herself.  It was
selfish of her."

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, taking a cigarette from his case
and producing a gold-latten matchbox, "the only way a woman can ever
reform a man is by boring him so completely that he loses all possible
interest in life.  If you had married this girl, you would have been
wretched.  Of course, you would have treated her kindly.  One can
always be kind to people about whom one cares nothing.  But she would
have soon found out that you were absolutely indifferent to her.  And
when a woman finds that out about her husband, she either becomes
dreadfully dowdy, or wears very smart bonnets that some other woman's
husband has to pay for.  I say nothing about the social mistake, which
would have been abject--which, of course, I would not have allowed--but
I assure you that in any case the whole thing would have been an
absolute failure."

"I suppose it would," muttered the lad, walking up and down the room
and looking horribly pale.  "But I thought it was my duty.  It is not
my fault that this terrible tragedy has prevented my doing what was
right.  I remember your saying once that there is a fatality about good
resolutions--that they are always made too late.  Mine certainly were."

"Good resolutions are useless attempts to interfere with scientific
laws.  Their origin is pure vanity.  Their result is absolutely _nil_.
They give us, now and then, some of those luxurious sterile emotions
that have a certain charm for the weak.  That is all that can be said
for them.  They are simply cheques that men draw on a bank where they
have no account."

"Harry," cried Dorian Gray, coming over and sitting down beside him,
"why is it that I cannot feel this tragedy as much as I want to?  I
don't think I am heartless.  Do you?"

"You have done too many foolish things during the last fortnight to be
entitled to give yourself that name, Dorian," answered Lord Henry with
his sweet melancholy smile.

The lad frowned.  "I don't like that explanation, Harry," he rejoined,
"but I am glad you don't think I am heartless.  I am nothing of the
kind.  I know I am not.  And yet I must admit that this thing that has
happened does not affect me as it should.  It seems to me to be simply
like a wonderful ending to a wonderful play.  It has all the terrible
beauty of a Greek tragedy, a tragedy in which I took a great part, but
by which I have not been wounded."

"It is an interesting question," said Lord Henry, who found an
exquisite pleasure in playing on the lad's unconscious egotism, "an
extremely interesting question.  I fancy that the true explanation is
this:  It often happens that the real tragedies of life occur in such
an inartistic manner that they hurt us by their crude violence, their
absolute incoherence, their absurd want of meaning, their entire lack
of style.  They affect us just as vulgarity affects us.  They give us
an impression of sheer brute force, and we revolt against that.
Sometimes, however, a tragedy that possesses artistic elements of
beauty crosses our lives.  If these elements of beauty are real, the
whole thing simply appeals to our sense of dramatic effect.  Suddenly
we find that we are no longer the actors, but the spectators of the
play.  Or rather we are both.  We watch ourselves, and the mere wonder
of the spectacle enthralls us.  In the present case, what is it that
has really happened?  Some one has killed herself for love of you.  I
wish that I had ever had such an experience.  It would have made me in
love with love for the rest of my life.  The people who have adored
me--there have not been very many, but there have been some--have
always insisted on living on, long after I had ceased to care for them,
or they to care for me.  They have become stout and tedious, and when I
meet them, they go in at once for reminiscences.  That awful memory of
woman!  What a fearful thing it is!  And what an utter intellectual
stagnation it reveals!  One should absorb the colour of life, but one
should never remember its details.  Details are always vulgar."

"I must sow poppies in my garden," sighed Dorian.

"There is no necessity," rejoined his companion.  "Life has always
poppies in her hands.  Of course, now and then things linger.  I once
wore nothing but violets all through one season, as a form of artistic
mourning for a romance that would not die.  Ultimately, however, it did
die.  I forget what killed it.  I think it was her proposing to
sacrifice the whole world for me.  That is always a dreadful moment.
It fills one with the terror of eternity.  Well--would you believe
it?--a week ago, at Lady Hampshire's, I found myself seated at dinner
next the lady in question, and she insisted on going over the whole
thing again, and digging up the past, and raking up the future.  I had
buried my romance in a bed of asphodel.  She dragged it out again and
assured me that I had spoiled her life.  I am bound to state that she
ate an enormous dinner, so I did not feel any anxiety.  But what a lack
of taste she showed!  The one charm of the past is that it is the past.
But women never know when the curtain has fallen.  They always want a
sixth act, and as soon as the interest of the play is entirely over,
they propose to continue it.  If they were allowed their own way, every
comedy would have a tragic ending, and every tragedy would culminate in
a farce.  They are charmingly artificial, but they have no sense of
art.  You are more fortunate than I am.  I assure you, Dorian, that not
one of the women I have known would have done for me what Sibyl Vane
did for you.  Ordinary women always console themselves.  Some of them
do it by going in for sentimental colours.  Never trust a woman who
wears mauve, whatever her age may be, or a woman over thirty-five who
is fond of pink ribbons.  It always means that they have a history.
Others find a great consolation in suddenly discovering the good
qualities of their husbands.  They flaunt their conjugal felicity in
one's face, as if it were the most fascinating of sins.  Religion
consoles some.  Its mysteries have all the charm of a flirtation, a
woman once told me, and I can quite understand it.  Besides, nothing
makes one so vain as being told that one is a sinner.  Conscience makes
egotists of us all.  Yes; there is really no end to the consolations
that women find in modern life.  Indeed, I have not mentioned the most
important one."

"What is that, Harry?" said the lad listlessly.

"Oh, the obvious consolation.  Taking some one else's admirer when one
loses one's own.  In good society that always whitewashes a woman.  But
really, Dorian, how different Sibyl Vane must have been from all the
women one meets!  There is something to me quite beautiful about her
death.  I am glad I am living in a century when such wonders happen.
They make one believe in the reality of the things we all play with,
such as romance, passion, and love."

"I was terribly cruel to her.  You forget that."

"I am afraid that women appreciate cruelty, downright cruelty, more
than anything else.  They have wonderfully primitive instincts.  We
have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their
masters, all the same.  They love being dominated.  I am sure you were
splendid.  I have never seen you really and absolutely angry, but I can
fancy how delightful you looked.  And, after all, you said something to
me the day before yesterday that seemed to me at the time to be merely
fanciful, but that I see now was absolutely true, and it holds the key
to everything."

"What was that, Harry?"

"You said to me that Sibyl Vane represented to you all the heroines of
romance--that she was Desdemona one night, and Ophelia the other; that
if she died as Juliet, she came to life as Imogen."

"She will never come to life again now," muttered the lad, burying his
face in his hands.

"No, she will never come to life.  She has played her last part.  But
you must think of that lonely death in the tawdry dressing-room simply
as a strange lurid fragment from some Jacobean tragedy, as a wonderful
scene from Webster, or Ford, or Cyril Tourneur.  The girl never really
lived, and so she has never really died.  To you at least she was
always a dream, a phantom that flitted through Shakespeare's plays and
left them lovelier for its presence, a reed through which Shakespeare's
music sounded richer and more full of joy.  The moment she touched
actual life, she marred it, and it marred her, and so she passed away.
Mourn for Ophelia, if you like.  Put ashes on your head because
Cordelia was strangled.  Cry out against Heaven because the daughter of
Brabantio died.  But don't waste your tears over Sibyl Vane.  She was
less real than they are."

There was a silence.  The evening darkened in the room.  Noiselessly,
and with silver feet, the shadows crept in from the garden.  The
colours faded wearily out of things.

After some time Dorian Gray looked up.  "You have explained me to
myself, Harry," he murmured with something of a sigh of relief.  "I
felt all that you have said, but somehow I was afraid of it, and I
could not express it to myself.  How well you know me!  But we will not
talk again of what has happened.  It has been a marvellous experience.
That is all.  I wonder if life has still in store for me anything as
marvellous."

"Life has everything in store for you, Dorian.  There is nothing that
you, with your extraordinary good looks, will not be able to do."

"But suppose, Harry, I became haggard, and old, and wrinkled?  What
then?"

"Ah, then," said Lord Henry, rising to go, "then, my dear Dorian, you
would have to fight for your victories.  As it is, they are brought to
you.  No, you must keep your good looks.  We live in an age that reads
too much to be wise, and that thinks too much to be beautiful.  We
cannot spare you.  And now you had better dress and drive down to the
club.  We are rather late, as it is."

"I think I shall join you at the opera, Harry.  I feel too tired to eat
anything.  What is the number of your sister's box?"

"Twenty-seven, I believe.  It is on the grand tier.  You will see her
name on the door.  But I am sorry you won't come and dine."

"I don't feel up to it," said Dorian listlessly.  "But I am awfully
obliged to you for all that you have said to me.  You are certainly my
best friend.  No one has ever understood me as you have."

"We are only at the beginning of our friendship, Dorian," answered Lord
Henry, shaking him by the hand.  "Good-bye. I shall see you before
nine-thirty, I hope.  Remember, Patti is singing."

As he closed the door behind him, Dorian Gray touched the bell, and in
a few minutes Victor appeared with the lamps and drew the blinds down.
He waited impatiently for him to go.  The man seemed to take an
interminable time over everything.

As soon as he had left, he rushed to the screen and drew it back.  No;
there was no further change in the picture.  It had received the news
of Sibyl Vane's death before he had known of it himself.  It was
conscious of the events of life as they occurred.  The vicious cruelty
that marred the fine lines of the mouth had, no doubt, appeared at the
very moment that the girl had drunk the poison, whatever it was.  Or
was it indifferent to results?  Did it merely take cognizance of what
passed within the soul?  He wondered, and hoped that some day he would
see the change taking place before his very eyes, shuddering as he
hoped it.

Poor Sibyl!  What a romance it had all been!  She had often mimicked
death on the stage.  Then Death himself had touched her and taken her
with him.  How had she played that dreadful last scene?  Had she cursed
him, as she died?  No; she had died for love of him, and love would
always be a sacrament to him now.  She had atoned for everything by the
sacrifice she had made of her life.  He would not think any more of
what she had made him go through, on that horrible night at the
theatre.  When he thought of her, it would be as a wonderful tragic
figure sent on to the world's stage to show the supreme reality of
love.  A wonderful tragic figure?  Tears came to his eyes as he
remembered her childlike look, and winsome fanciful ways, and shy
tremulous grace.  He brushed them away hastily and looked again at the
picture.

He felt that the time had really come for making his choice.  Or had
his choice already been made?  Yes, life had decided that for
him--life, and his own infinite curiosity about life.  Eternal youth,
infinite passion, pleasures subtle and secret, wild joys and wilder
sins--he was to have all these things.  The portrait was to bear the
burden of his shame: that was all.

A feeling of pain crept over him as he thought of the desecration that
was in store for the fair face on the canvas.  Once, in boyish mockery
of Narcissus, he had kissed, or feigned to kiss, those painted lips
that now smiled so cruelly at him.  Morning after morning he had sat
before the portrait wondering at its beauty, almost enamoured of it, as
it seemed to him at times.  Was it to alter now with every mood to
which he yielded?  Was it to become a monstrous and loathsome thing, to
be hidden away in a locked room, to be shut out from the sunlight that
had so often touched to brighter gold the waving wonder of its hair?
The pity of it! the pity of it!

For a moment, he thought of praying that the horrible sympathy that
existed between him and the picture might cease.  It had changed in
answer to a prayer; perhaps in answer to a prayer it might remain
unchanged.  And yet, who, that knew anything about life, would
surrender the chance of remaining always young, however fantastic that
chance might be, or with what fateful consequences it might be fraught?
Besides, was it really under his control?  Had it indeed been prayer
that had produced the substitution?  Might there not be some curious
scientific reason for it all?  If thought could exercise its influence
upon a living organism, might not thought exercise an influence upon
dead and inorganic things?  Nay, without thought or conscious desire,
might not things external to ourselves vibrate in unison with our moods
and passions, atom calling to atom in secret love or strange affinity?
But the reason was of no importance.  He would never again tempt by a
prayer any terrible power.  If the picture was to alter, it was to
alter.  That was all.  Why inquire too closely into it?

For there would be a real pleasure in watching it.  He would be able to
follow his mind into its secret places.  This portrait would be to him
the most magical of mirrors.  As it had revealed to him his own body,
so it would reveal to him his own soul.  And when winter came upon it,
he would still be standing where spring trembles on the verge of
summer.  When the blood crept from its face, and left behind a pallid
mask of chalk with leaden eyes, he would keep the glamour of boyhood.
Not one blossom of his loveliness would ever fade.  Not one pulse of
his life would ever weaken.  Like the gods of the Greeks, he would be
strong, and fleet, and joyous.  What did it matter what happened to the
coloured image on the canvas?  He would be safe.  That was everything.

He drew the screen back into its former place in front of the picture,
smiling as he did so, and passed into his bedroom, where his valet was
already waiting for him.  An hour later he was at the opera, and Lord
Henry was leaning over his chair.





As he was sitting at breakfast next morning, Basil Hallward was shown
into the room.

"I am so glad I have found you, Dorian," he said gravely.  "I called
last night, and they told me you were at the opera.  Of course, I knew
that was impossible.  But I wish you had left word where you had really
gone to.  I passed a dreadful evening, half afraid that one tragedy
might be followed by another.  I think you might have telegraphed for
me when you heard of it first.  I read of it quite by chance in a late
edition of _The Globe_ that I picked up at the club.  I came here at once
and was miserable at not finding you.  I can't tell you how
heart-broken I am about the whole thing.  I know what you must suffer.
But where were you?  Did you go down and see the girl's mother?  For a
moment I thought of following you there.  They gave the address in the
paper.  Somewhere in the Euston Road, isn't it?  But I was afraid of
intruding upon a sorrow that I could not lighten.  Poor woman!  What a
state she must be in!  And her only child, too!  What did she say about
it all?"

"My dear Basil, how do I know?" murmured Dorian Gray, sipping some
pale-yellow wine from a delicate, gold-beaded bubble of Venetian glass
and looking dreadfully bored.  "I was at the opera.  You should have
come on there.  I met Lady Gwendolen, Harry's sister, for the first
time.  We were in her box.  She is perfectly charming; and Patti sang
divinely.  Don't talk about horrid subjects.  If one doesn't talk about
a thing, it has never happened.  It is simply expression, as Harry
says, that gives reality to things.  I may mention that she was not the
woman's only child.  There is a son, a charming fellow, I believe.  But
he is not on the stage.  He is a sailor, or something.  And now, tell
me about yourself and what you are painting."

"You went to the opera?" said Hallward, speaking very slowly and with a
strained touch of pain in his voice.  "You went to the opera while
Sibyl Vane was lying dead in some sordid lodging?  You can talk to me
of other women being charming, and of Patti singing divinely, before
the girl you loved has even the quiet of a grave to sleep in?  Why,
man, there are horrors in store for that little white body of hers!"

"Stop, Basil!  I won't hear it!" cried Dorian, leaping to his feet.
"You must not tell me about things.  What is done is done.  What is
past is past."

"You call yesterday the past?"

"What has the actual lapse of time got to do with it?  It is only
shallow people who require years to get rid of an emotion.  A man who
is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
pleasure.  I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions.  I want to
use them, to enjoy them, and to dominate them."

"Dorian, this is horrible!  Something has changed you completely.  You
look exactly the same wonderful boy who, day after day, used to come
down to my studio to sit for his picture.  But you were simple,
natural, and affectionate then.  You were the most unspoiled creature
in the whole world.  Now, I don't know what has come over you.  You
talk as if you had no heart, no pity in you.  It is all Harry's
influence.  I see that."

The lad flushed up and, going to the window, looked out for a few
moments on the green, flickering, sun-lashed garden.  "I owe a great
deal to Harry, Basil," he said at last, "more than I owe to you.  You
only taught me to be vain."

"Well, I am punished for that, Dorian--or shall be some day."

"I don't know what you mean, Basil," he exclaimed, turning round.  "I
don't know what you want.  What do you want?"

"I want the Dorian Gray I used to paint," said the artist sadly.

"Basil," said the lad, going over to him and putting his hand on his
shoulder, "you have come too late.  Yesterday, when I heard that Sibyl
Vane had killed herself--"

"Killed herself!  Good heavens! is there no doubt about that?" cried
Hallward, looking up at him with an expression of horror.

"My dear Basil!  Surely you don't think it was a vulgar accident?  Of
course she killed herself."

The elder man buried his face in his hands.  "How fearful," he
muttered, and a shudder ran through him.

"No," said Dorian Gray, "there is nothing fearful about it.  It is one
of the great romantic tragedies of the age.  As a rule, people who act
lead the most commonplace lives.  They are good husbands, or faithful
wives, or something tedious.  You know what I mean--middle-class virtue
and all that kind of thing.  How different Sibyl was!  She lived her
finest tragedy.  She was always a heroine.  The last night she
played--the night you saw her--she acted badly because she had known
the reality of love.  When she knew its unreality, she died, as Juliet
might have died.  She passed again into the sphere of art.  There is
something of the martyr about her.  Her death has all the pathetic
uselessness of martyrdom, all its wasted beauty.  But, as I was saying,
you must not think I have not suffered.  If you had come in yesterday
at a particular moment--about half-past five, perhaps, or a quarter to
six--you would have found me in tears.  Even Harry, who was here, who
brought me the news, in fact, had no idea what I was going through.  I
suffered immensely.  Then it passed away.  I cannot repeat an emotion.
No one can, except sentimentalists.  And you are awfully unjust, Basil.
You come down here to console me.  That is charming of you.  You find
me consoled, and you are furious.  How like a sympathetic person!  You
remind me of a story Harry told me about a certain philanthropist who
spent twenty years of his life in trying to get some grievance
redressed, or some unjust law altered--I forget exactly what it was.
Finally he succeeded, and nothing could exceed his disappointment.  He
had absolutely nothing to do, almost died of _ennui_, and became a
confirmed misanthrope.  And besides, my dear old Basil, if you really
want to console me, teach me rather to forget what has happened, or to
see it from a proper artistic point of view.  Was it not Gautier who
used to write about _la consolation des arts_?  I remember picking up a
little vellum-covered book in your studio one day and chancing on that
delightful phrase.  Well, I am not like that young man you told me of
when we were down at Marlow together, the young man who used to say
that yellow satin could console one for all the miseries of life.  I
love beautiful things that one can touch and handle.  Old brocades,
green bronzes, lacquer-work, carved ivories, exquisite surroundings,
luxury, pomp--there is much to be got from all these.  But the artistic
temperament that they create, or at any rate reveal, is still more to
me.  To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says, is to
escape the suffering of life.  I know you are surprised at my talking
to you like this.  You have not realized how I have developed.  I was a
schoolboy when you knew me.  I am a man now.  I have new passions, new
thoughts, new ideas.  I am different, but you must not like me less.  I
am changed, but you must always be my friend.  Of course, I am very
fond of Harry.  But I know that you are better than he is.  You are not
stronger--you are too much afraid of life--but you are better.  And how
happy we used to be together!  Don't leave me, Basil, and don't quarrel
with me.  I am what I am.  There is nothing more to be said."

The painter felt strangely moved.  The lad was infinitely dear to him,
and his personality had been the great turning point in his art.  He
could not bear the idea of reproaching him any more.  After all, his
indifference was probably merely a mood that would pass away.  There
was so much in him that was good, so much in him that was noble.

"Well, Dorian," he said at length, with a sad smile, "I won't speak to
you again about this horrible thing, after to-day.  I only trust your
name won't be mentioned in connection with it.  The inquest is to take
place this afternoon.  Have they summoned you?"

Dorian shook his head, and a look of annoyance passed over his face at
the mention of the word "inquest."  There was something so crude and
vulgar about everything of the kind.  "They don't know my name," he
answered.

"But surely she did?"

"Only my Christian name, and that I am quite sure she never mentioned
to any one.  She told me once that they were all rather curious to
learn who I was, and that she invariably told them my name was Prince
Charming.  It was pretty of her.  You must do me a drawing of Sibyl,
Basil.  I should like to have something more of her than the memory of
a few kisses and some broken pathetic words."

"I will try and do something, Dorian, if it would please you.  But you
must come and sit to me yourself again.  I can't get on without you."

"I can never sit to you again, Basil.  It is impossible!" he exclaimed,
starting back.

The painter stared at him.  "My dear boy, what nonsense!" he cried.
"Do you mean to say you don't like what I did of you?  Where is it?
Why have you pulled the screen in front of it?  Let me look at it.  It
is the best thing I have ever done.  Do take the screen away, Dorian.
It is simply disgraceful of your servant hiding my work like that.  I
felt the room looked different as I came in."

"My servant has nothing to do with it, Basil.  You don't imagine I let
him arrange my room for me?  He settles my flowers for me
sometimes--that is all.  No; I did it myself.  The light was too strong
on the portrait."

"Too strong!  Surely not, my dear fellow?  It is an admirable place for
it.  Let me see it."  And Hallward walked towards the corner of the
room.

A cry of terror broke from Dorian Gray's lips, and he rushed between
the painter and the screen.  "Basil," he said, looking very pale, "you
must not look at it.  I don't wish you to."

"Not look at my own work!  You are not serious.  Why shouldn't I look
at it?" exclaimed Hallward, laughing.

"If you try to look at it, Basil, on my word of honour I will never
speak to you again as long as I live.  I am quite serious.  I don't
offer any explanation, and you are not to ask for any.  But, remember,
if you touch this screen, everything is over between us."

Hallward was thunderstruck.  He looked at Dorian Gray in absolute
amazement.  He had never seen him like this before.  The lad was
actually pallid with rage.  His hands were clenched, and the pupils of
his eyes were like disks of blue fire.  He was trembling all over.

"Dorian!"

"Don't speak!"

"But what is the matter?  Of course I won't look at it if you don't
want me to," he said, rather coldly, turning on his heel and going over
towards the window.  "But, really, it seems rather absurd that I
shouldn't see my own work, especially as I am going to exhibit it in
Paris in the autumn.  I shall probably have to give it another coat of
varnish before that, so I must see it some day, and why not to-day?"

"To exhibit it!  You want to exhibit it?" exclaimed Dorian Gray, a
strange sense of terror creeping over him.  Was the world going to be
shown his secret?  Were people to gape at the mystery of his life?
That was impossible.  Something--he did not know what--had to be done
at once.

"Yes; I don't suppose you will object to that.  Georges Petit is going
to collect all my best pictures for a special exhibition in the Rue de
Seze, which will open the first week in October.  The portrait will
only be away a month.  I should think you could easily spare it for
that time.  In fact, you are sure to be out of town.  And if you keep
it always behind a screen, you can't care much about it."

Dorian Gray passed his hand over his forehead.  There were beads of
perspiration there.  He felt that he was on the brink of a horrible
danger.  "You told me a month ago that you would never exhibit it," he
cried.  "Why have you changed your mind?  You people who go in for
being consistent have just as many moods as others have.  The only
difference is that your moods are rather meaningless.  You can't have
forgotten that you assured me most solemnly that nothing in the world
would induce you to send it to any exhibition.  You told Harry exactly
the same thing." He stopped suddenly, and a gleam of light came into
his eyes.  He remembered that Lord Henry had said to him once, half
seriously and half in jest, "If you want to have a strange quarter of
an hour, get Basil to tell you why he won't exhibit your picture.  He
told me why he wouldn't, and it was a revelation to me."  Yes, perhaps
Basil, too, had his secret.  He would ask him and try.

"Basil," he said, coming over quite close and looking him straight in
the face, "we have each of us a secret.  Let me know yours, and I shall
tell you mine.  What was your reason for refusing to exhibit my
picture?"

The painter shuddered in spite of himself.  "Dorian, if I told you, you
might like me less than you do, and you would certainly laugh at me.  I
could not bear your doing either of those two things.  If you wish me
never to look at your picture again, I am content.  I have always you
to look at.  If you wish the best work I have ever done to be hidden
from the world, I am satisfied.  Your friendship is dearer to me than
any fame or reputation."

"No, Basil, you must tell me," insisted Dorian Gray.  "I think I have a
right to know."  His feeling of terror had passed away, and curiosity
had taken its place.  He was determined to find out Basil Hallward's
mystery.

"Let us sit down, Dorian," said the painter, looking troubled.  "Let us
sit down.  And just answer me one question.  Have you noticed in the
picture something curious?--something that probably at first did not
strike you, but that revealed itself to you suddenly?"

"Basil!" cried the lad, clutching the arms of his chair with trembling
hands and gazing at him with wild startled eyes.

"I see you did.  Don't speak.  Wait till you hear what I have to say.
Dorian, from the moment I met you, your personality had the most
extraordinary influence over me.  I was dominated, soul, brain, and
power, by you.  You became to me the visible incarnation of that unseen
ideal whose memory haunts us artists like an exquisite dream.  I
worshipped you.  I grew jealous of every one to whom you spoke.  I
wanted to have you all to myself.  I was only happy when I was with
you.  When you were away from me, you were still present in my art....
Of course, I never let you know anything about this.  It would have
been impossible.  You would not have understood it.  I hardly
understood it myself.  I only knew that I had seen perfection face to
face, and that the world had become wonderful to my eyes--too
wonderful, perhaps, for in such mad worships there is peril, the peril
of losing them, no less than the peril of keeping them....  Weeks and
weeks went on, and I grew more and more absorbed in you.  Then came a
new development.  I had drawn you as Paris in dainty armour, and as
Adonis with huntsman's cloak and polished boar-spear. Crowned with
heavy lotus-blossoms you had sat on the prow of Adrian's barge, gazing
across the green turbid Nile.  You had leaned over the still pool of
some Greek woodland and seen in the water's silent silver the marvel of
your own face.  And it had all been what art should be--unconscious,
ideal, and remote.  One day, a fatal day I sometimes think, I
determined to paint a wonderful portrait of you as you actually are,
not in the costume of dead ages, but in your own dress and in your own
time.  Whether it was the realism of the method, or the mere wonder of
your own personality, thus directly presented to me without mist or
veil, I cannot tell.  But I know that as I worked at it, every flake
and film of colour seemed to me to reveal my secret.  I grew afraid
that others would know of my idolatry.  I felt, Dorian, that I had told
too much, that I had put too much of myself into it.  Then it was that
I resolved never to allow the picture to be exhibited.  You were a
little annoyed; but then you did not realize all that it meant to me.
Harry, to whom I talked about it, laughed at me.  But I did not mind
that.  When the picture was finished, and I sat alone with it, I felt
that I was right.... Well, after a few days the thing left my studio,
and as soon as I had got rid of the intolerable fascination of its
presence, it seemed to me that I had been foolish in imagining that I
had seen anything in it, more than that you were extremely good-looking
and that I could paint.  Even now I cannot help feeling that it is a
mistake to think that the passion one feels in creation is ever really
shown in the work one creates.  Art is always more abstract than we
fancy.  Form and colour tell us of form and colour--that is all.  It
often seems to me that art conceals the artist far more completely than
it ever reveals him.  And so when I got this offer from Paris, I
determined to make your portrait the principal thing in my exhibition.
It never occurred to me that you would refuse.  I see now that you were
right.  The picture cannot be shown.  You must not be angry with me,
Dorian, for what I have told you.  As I said to Harry, once, you are
made to be worshipped."

Dorian Gray drew a long breath.  The colour came back to his cheeks,
and a smile played about his lips.  The peril was over.  He was safe
for the time.  Yet he could not help feeling infinite pity for the
painter who had just made this strange confession to him, and wondered
if he himself would ever be so dominated by the personality of a
friend.  Lord Henry had the charm of being very dangerous.  But that
was all.  He was too clever and too cynical to be really fond of.
Would there ever be some one who would fill him with a strange
idolatry?  Was that one of the things that life had in store?

"It is extraordinary to me, Dorian," said Hallward, "that you should
have seen this in the portrait.  Did you really see it?"

"I saw something in it," he answered, "something that seemed to me very
curious."

"Well, you don't mind my looking at the thing now?"

Dorian shook his head.  "You must not ask me that, Basil.  I could not
possibly let you stand in front of that picture."

"You will some day, surely?"

"Never."

"Well, perhaps you are right.  And now good-bye, Dorian.  You have been
the one person in my life who has really influenced my art.  Whatever I
have done that is good, I owe to you.  Ah! you don't know what it cost
me to tell you all that I have told you."

"My dear Basil," said Dorian, "what have you told me?  Simply that you
felt that you admired me too much.  That is not even a compliment."

"It was not intended as a compliment.  It was a confession.  Now that I
have made it, something seems to have gone out of me.  Perhaps one
should never put one's worship into words."

"It was a very disappointing confession."

"Why, what did you expect, Dorian?  You didn't see anything else in the
picture, did you?  There was nothing else to see?"

"No; there was nothing else to see.  Why do you ask?  But you mustn't
talk about worship.  It is foolish.  You and I are friends, Basil, and
we must always remain so."

"You have got Harry," said the painter sadly.

"Oh, Harry!" cried the lad, with a ripple of laughter.  "Harry spends
his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing what is
improbable.  Just the sort of life I would like to lead.  But still I
don't think I would go to Harry if I were in trouble.  I would sooner
go to you, Basil."

"You will sit to me again?"

"Impossible!"

"You spoil my life as an artist by refusing, Dorian.  No man comes
across two ideal things.  Few come across one."

"I can't explain it to you, Basil, but I must never sit to you again.
There is something fatal about a portrait.  It has a life of its own.
I will come and have tea with you.  That will be just as pleasant."

"Pleasanter for you, I am afraid," murmured Hallward regretfully.  "And
now good-bye. I am sorry you won't let me look at the picture once
again.  But that can't be helped.  I quite understand what you feel
about it."

As he left the room, Dorian Gray smiled to himself.  Poor Basil!  How
little he knew of the true reason!  And how strange it was that,
instead of having been forced to reveal his own secret, he had
succeeded, almost by chance, in wresting a secret from his friend!  How
much that strange confession explained to him!  The painter's absurd
fits of jealousy, his wild devotion, his extravagant panegyrics, his
curious reticences--he understood them all now, and he felt sorry.
There seemed to him to be something tragic in a friendship so coloured
by romance.

He sighed and touched the bell.  The portrait must be hidden away at
all costs.  He could not run such a risk of discovery again.  It had
been mad of him to have allowed the thing to remain, even for an hour,
in a room to which any of his friends had access.





When his servant entered, he looked at him steadfastly and wondered if
he had thought of peering behind the screen.  The man was quite
impassive and waited for his orders.  Dorian lit a cigarette and walked
over to the glass and glanced into it.  He could see the reflection of
Victor's face perfectly.  It was like a placid mask of servility.
There was nothing to be afraid of, there.  Yet he thought it best to be
on his guard.

Speaking very slowly, he told him to tell the house-keeper that he
wanted to see her, and then to go to the frame-maker and ask him to
send two of his men round at once.  It seemed to him that as the man
left the room his eyes wandered in the direction of the screen.  Or was
that merely his own fancy?

After a few moments, in her black silk dress, with old-fashioned thread
mittens on her wrinkled hands, Mrs. Leaf bustled into the library.  He
asked her for the key of the schoolroom.

"The old schoolroom, Mr. Dorian?" she exclaimed.  "Why, it is full of
dust.  I must get it arranged and put straight before you go into it.
It is not fit for you to see, sir.  It is not, indeed."

"I don't want it put straight, Leaf.  I only want the key."

"Well, sir, you'll be covered with cobwebs if you go into it.  Why, it
hasn't been opened for nearly five years--not since his lordship died."

He winced at the mention of his grandfather.  He had hateful memories
of him.  "That does not matter," he answered.  "I simply want to see
the place--that is all.  Give me the key."

"And here is the key, sir," said the old lady, going over the contents
of her bunch with tremulously uncertain hands.  "Here is the key.  I'll
have it off the bunch in a moment.  But you don't think of living up
there, sir, and you so comfortable here?"

"No, no," he cried petulantly.  "Thank you, Leaf.  That will do."

She lingered for a few moments, and was garrulous over some detail of
the household.  He sighed and told her to manage things as she thought
best.  She left the room, wreathed in smiles.

As the door closed, Dorian put the key in his pocket and looked round
the room.  His eye fell on a large, purple satin coverlet heavily
embroidered with gold, a splendid piece of late seventeenth-century
Venetian work that his grandfather had found in a convent near Bologna.
Yes, that would serve to wrap the dreadful thing in.  It had perhaps
served often as a pall for the dead.  Now it was to hide something that
had a corruption of its own, worse than the corruption of death
itself--something that would breed horrors and yet would never die.
What the worm was to the corpse, his sins would be to the painted image
on the canvas.  They would mar its beauty and eat away its grace.  They
would defile it and make it shameful.  And yet the thing would still
live on.  It would be always alive.

He shuddered, and for a moment he regretted that he had not told Basil
the true reason why he had wished to hide the picture away.  Basil
would have helped him to resist Lord Henry's influence, and the still
more poisonous influences that came from his own temperament.  The love
that he bore him--for it was really love--had nothing in it that was
not noble and intellectual.  It was not that mere physical admiration
of beauty that is born of the senses and that dies when the senses
tire.  It was such love as Michelangelo had known, and Montaigne, and
Winckelmann, and Shakespeare himself.  Yes, Basil could have saved him.
But it was too late now.  The past could always be annihilated.
Regret, denial, or forgetfulness could do that.  But the future was
inevitable.  There were passions in him that would find their terrible
outlet, dreams that would make the shadow of their evil real.

He took up from the couch the great purple-and-gold texture that
covered it, and, holding it in his hands, passed behind the screen.
Was the face on the canvas viler than before?  It seemed to him that it
was unchanged, and yet his loathing of it was intensified.  Gold hair,
blue eyes, and rose-red lips--they all were there.  It was simply the
expression that had altered.  That was horrible in its cruelty.
Compared to what he saw in it of censure or rebuke, how shallow Basil's
reproaches about Sibyl Vane had been!--how shallow, and of what little
account!  His own soul was looking out at him from the canvas and
calling him to judgement.  A look of pain came across him, and he flung
the rich pall over the picture.  As he did so, a knock came to the
door.  He passed out as his servant entered.

"The persons are here, Monsieur."

He felt that the man must be got rid of at once.  He must not be
allowed to know where the picture was being taken to.  There was
something sly about him, and he had thoughtful, treacherous eyes.
Sitting down at the writing-table he scribbled a note to Lord Henry,
asking him to send him round something to read and reminding him that
they were to meet at eight-fifteen that evening.

"Wait for an answer," he said, handing it to him, "and show the men in
here."

In two or three minutes there was another knock, and Mr. Hubbard
himself, the celebrated frame-maker of South Audley Street, came in
with a somewhat rough-looking young assistant.  Mr. Hubbard was a
florid, red-whiskered little man, whose admiration for art was
considerably tempered by the inveterate impecuniosity of most of the
artists who dealt with him.  As a rule, he never left his shop.  He
waited for people to come to him.  But he always made an exception in
favour of Dorian Gray.  There was something about Dorian that charmed
everybody.  It was a pleasure even to see him.

"What can I do for you, Mr. Gray?" he said, rubbing his fat freckled
hands.  "I thought I would do myself the honour of coming round in
person.  I have just got a beauty of a frame, sir.  Picked it up at a
sale.  Old Florentine.  Came from Fonthill, I believe.  Admirably
suited for a religious subject, Mr. Gray."

"I am so sorry you have given yourself the trouble of coming round, Mr.
Hubbard.  I shall certainly drop in and look at the frame--though I
don't go in much at present for religious art--but to-day I only want a
picture carried to the top of the house for me.  It is rather heavy, so
I thought I would ask you to lend me a couple of your men."

"No trouble at all, Mr. Gray.  I am delighted to be of any service to
you.  Which is the work of art, sir?"

"This," replied Dorian, moving the screen back.  "Can you move it,
covering and all, just as it is?  I don't want it to get scratched
going upstairs."

"There will be no difficulty, sir," said the genial frame-maker,
beginning, with the aid of his assistant, to unhook the picture from
the long brass chains by which it was suspended.  "And, now, where
shall we carry it to, Mr. Gray?"

"I will show you the way, Mr. Hubbard, if you will kindly follow me.
Or perhaps you had better go in front.  I am afraid it is right at the
top of the house.  We will go up by the front staircase, as it is
wider."

He held the door open for them, and they passed out into the hall and
began the ascent.  The elaborate character of the frame had made the
picture extremely bulky, and now and then, in spite of the obsequious
protests of Mr. Hubbard, who had the true tradesman's spirited dislike
of seeing a gentleman doing anything useful, Dorian put his hand to it
so as to help them.

"Something of a load to carry, sir," gasped the little man when they
reached the top landing.  And he wiped his shiny forehead.

"I am afraid it is rather heavy," murmured Dorian as he unlocked the
door that opened into the room that was to keep for him the curious
secret of his life and hide his soul from the eyes of men.

He had not entered the place for more than four years--not, indeed,
since he had used it first as a play-room when he was a child, and then
as a study when he grew somewhat older.  It was a large,
well-proportioned room, which had been specially built by the last Lord
Kelso for the use of the little grandson whom, for his strange likeness
to his mother, and also for other reasons, he had always hated and
desired to keep at a distance.  It appeared to Dorian to have but
little changed.  There was the huge Italian _cassone_, with its
fantastically painted panels and its tarnished gilt mouldings, in which
he had so often hidden himself as a boy.  There the satinwood book-case
filled with his dog-eared schoolbooks.  On the wall behind it was
hanging the same ragged Flemish tapestry where a faded king and queen
were playing chess in a garden, while a company of hawkers rode by,
carrying hooded birds on their gauntleted wrists.  How well he
remembered it all!  Every moment of his lonely childhood came back to
him as he looked round.  He recalled the stainless purity of his boyish
life, and it seemed horrible to him that it was here the fatal portrait
was to be hidden away.  How little he had thought, in those dead days,
of all that was in store for him!

But there was no other place in the house so secure from prying eyes as
this.  He had the key, and no one else could enter it.  Beneath its
purple pall, the face painted on the canvas could grow bestial, sodden,
and unclean.  What did it matter?  No one could see it.  He himself
would not see it.  Why should he watch the hideous corruption of his
soul?  He kept his youth--that was enough.  And, besides, might not
his nature grow finer, after all?  There was no reason that the future
should be so full of shame.  Some love might come across his life, and
purify him, and shield him from those sins that seemed to be already
stirring in spirit and in flesh--those curious unpictured sins whose
very mystery lent them their subtlety and their charm.  Perhaps, some
day, the cruel look would have passed away from the scarlet sensitive
mouth, and he might show to the world Basil Hallward's masterpiece.

No; that was impossible.  Hour by hour, and week by week, the thing
upon the canvas was growing old.  It might escape the hideousness of
sin, but the hideousness of age was in store for it.  The cheeks would
become hollow or flaccid.  Yellow crow's feet would creep round the
fading eyes and make them horrible.  The hair would lose its
brightness, the mouth would gape or droop, would be foolish or gross,
as the mouths of old men are.  There would be the wrinkled throat, the
cold, blue-veined hands, the twisted body, that he remembered in the
grandfather who had been so stern to him in his boyhood.  The picture
had to be concealed.  There was no help for it.

"Bring it in, Mr. Hubbard, please," he said, wearily, turning round.
"I am sorry I kept you so long.  I was thinking of something else."

"Always glad to have a rest, Mr. Gray," answered the frame-maker, who
was still gasping for breath.  "Where shall we put it, sir?"

"Oh, anywhere.  Here:  this will do.  I don't want to have it hung up.
Just lean it against the wall.  Thanks."

"Might one look at the work of art, sir?"

Dorian started.  "It would not interest you, Mr. Hubbard," he said,
keeping his eye on the man.  He felt ready to leap upon him and fling
him to the ground if he dared to lift the gorgeous hanging that
concealed the secret of his life.  "I shan't trouble you any more now.
I am much obliged for your kindness in coming round."

"Not at all, not at all, Mr. Gray.  Ever ready to do anything for you,
sir." And Mr. Hubbard tramped downstairs, followed by the assistant,
who glanced back at Dorian with a look of shy wonder in his rough
uncomely face.  He had never seen any one so marvellous.

When the sound of their footsteps had died away, Dorian locked the door
and put the key in his pocket.  He felt safe now.  No one would ever
look upon the horrible thing.  No eye but his would ever see his shame.

On reaching the library, he found that it was just after five o'clock
and that the tea had been already brought up.  On a little table of
dark perfumed wood thickly incrusted with nacre, a present from Lady
Radley, his guardian's wife, a pretty professional invalid who had
spent the preceding winter in Cairo, was lying a note from Lord Henry,
and beside it was a book bound in yellow paper, the cover slightly torn
and the edges soiled.  A copy of the third edition of _The St. James's
Gazette_ had been placed on the tea-tray. It was evident that Victor had
returned.  He wondered if he had met the men in the hall as they were
leaving the house and had wormed out of them what they had been doing.
He would be sure to miss the picture--had no doubt missed it already,
while he had been laying the tea-things. The screen had not been set
back, and a blank space was visible on the wall.  Perhaps some night he
might find him creeping upstairs and trying to force the door of the
room.  It was a horrible thing to have a spy in one's house.  He had
heard of rich men who had been blackmailed all their lives by some
servant who had read a letter, or overheard a conversation, or picked
up a card with an address, or found beneath a pillow a withered flower
or a shred of crumpled lace.

He sighed, and having poured himself out some tea, opened Lord Henry's
note.  It was simply to say that he sent him round the evening paper,
and a book that might interest him, and that he would be at the club at
eight-fifteen. He opened _The St. James's_ languidly, and looked through
it.  A red pencil-mark on the fifth page caught his eye.  It drew
attention to the following paragraph:


INQUEST ON AN ACTRESS.--An inquest was held this morning at the Bell
Tavern, Hoxton Road, by Mr. Danby, the District Coroner, on the body of
Sibyl Vane, a young actress recently engaged at the Royal Theatre,
Holborn.  A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Considerable sympathy was expressed for the mother of the deceased, who
was greatly affected during the giving of her own evidence, and that of
Dr. Birrell, who had made the post-mortem examination of the deceased.


He frowned, and tearing the paper in two, went across the room and
flung the pieces away.  How ugly it all was!  And how horribly real
ugliness made things!  He felt a little annoyed with Lord Henry for
having sent him the report.  And it was certainly stupid of him to have
marked it with red pencil.  Victor might have read it.  The man knew
more than enough English for that.

Perhaps he had read it and had begun to suspect something.  And, yet,
what did it matter?  What had Dorian Gray to do with Sibyl Vane's
death?  There was nothing to fear.  Dorian Gray had not killed her.

His eye fell on the yellow book that Lord Henry had sent him.  What was
it, he wondered.  He went towards the little, pearl-coloured octagonal
stand that had always looked to him like the work of some strange
Egyptian bees that wrought in silver, and taking up the volume, flung
himself into an arm-chair and began to turn over the leaves.  After a
few minutes he became absorbed.  It was the strangest book that he had
ever read.  It seemed to him that in exquisite raiment, and to the
delicate sound of flutes, the sins of the world were passing in dumb
show before him.  Things that he had dimly dreamed of were suddenly
made real to him.  Things of which he had never dreamed were gradually
revealed.

It was a novel without a plot and with only one character, being,
indeed, simply a psychological study of a certain young Parisian who
spent his life trying to realize in the nineteenth century all the
passions and modes of thought that belonged to every century except his
own, and to sum up, as it were, in himself the various moods through
which the world-spirit had ever passed, loving for their mere
artificiality those renunciations that men have unwisely called virtue,
as much as those natural rebellions that wise men still call sin.  The
style in which it was written was that curious jewelled style, vivid
and obscure at once, full of _argot_ and of archaisms, of technical
expressions and of elaborate paraphrases, that characterizes the work
of some of the finest artists of the French school of _Symbolistes_.
There were in it metaphors as monstrous as orchids and as subtle in
colour.  The life of the senses was described in the terms of mystical
philosophy.  One hardly knew at times whether one was reading the
spiritual ecstasies of some mediaeval saint or the morbid confessions
of a modern sinner.  It was a poisonous book.  The heavy odour of
incense seemed to cling about its pages and to trouble the brain.  The
mere cadence of the sentences, the subtle monotony of their music, so
full as it was of complex refrains and movements elaborately repeated,
produced in the mind of the lad, as he passed from chapter to chapter,
a form of reverie, a malady of dreaming, that made him unconscious of
the falling day and creeping shadows.

Cloudless, and pierced by one solitary star, a copper-green sky gleamed
through the windows.  He read on by its wan light till he could read no
more.  Then, after his valet had reminded him several times of the
lateness of the hour, he got up, and going into the next room, placed
the book on the little Florentine table that always stood at his
bedside and began to dress for dinner.

It was almost nine o'clock before he reached the club, where he found
Lord Henry sitting alone, in the morning-room, looking very much bored.

"I am so sorry, Harry," he cried, "but really it is entirely your
fault.  That book you sent me so fascinated me that I forgot how the
time was going."

"Yes, I thought you would like it," replied his host, rising from his
chair.

"I didn't say I liked it, Harry.  I said it fascinated me.  There is a
great difference."

"Ah, you have discovered that?" murmured Lord Henry.  And they passed
into the dining-room.





For years, Dorian Gray could not free himself from the influence of
this book.  Or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that he never
sought to free himself from it.  He procured from Paris no less than
nine large-paper copies of the first edition, and had them bound in
different colours, so that they might suit his various moods and the
changing fancies of a nature over which he seemed, at times, to have
almost entirely lost control.  The hero, the wonderful young Parisian
in whom the romantic and the scientific temperaments were so strangely
blended, became to him a kind of prefiguring type of himself.  And,
indeed, the whole book seemed to him to contain the story of his own
life, written before he had lived it.

In one point he was more fortunate than the novel's fantastic hero.  He
never knew--never, indeed, had any cause to know--that somewhat
grotesque dread of mirrors, and polished metal surfaces, and still
water which came upon the young Parisian so early in his life, and was
occasioned by the sudden decay of a beau that had once, apparently,
been so remarkable.  It was with an almost cruel joy--and perhaps in
nearly every joy, as certainly in every pleasure, cruelty has its
place--that he used to read the latter part of the book, with its
really tragic, if somewhat overemphasized, account of the sorrow and
despair of one who had himself lost what in others, and the world, he
had most dearly valued.

For the wonderful beauty that had so fascinated Basil Hallward, and
many others besides him, seemed never to leave him.  Even those who had
heard the most evil things against him--and from time to time strange
rumours about his mode of life crept through London and became the
chatter of the clubs--could not believe anything to his dishonour when
they saw him.  He had always the look of one who had kept himself
unspotted from the world.  Men who talked grossly became silent when
Dorian Gray entered the room.  There was something in the purity of his
face that rebuked them.  His mere presence seemed to recall to them the
memory of the innocence that they had tarnished.  They wondered how one
so charming and graceful as he was could have escaped the stain of an
age that was at once sordid and sensual.

Often, on returning home from one of those mysterious and prolonged
absences that gave rise to such strange conjecture among those who were
his friends, or thought that they were so, he himself would creep
upstairs to the locked room, open the door with the key that never left
him now, and stand, with a mirror, in front of the portrait that Basil
Hallward had painted of him, looking now at the evil and aging face on
the canvas, and now at the fair young face that laughed back at him
from the polished glass.  The very sharpness of the contrast used to
quicken his sense of pleasure.  He grew more and more enamoured of his
own beauty, more and more interested in the corruption of his own soul.
He would examine with minute care, and sometimes with a monstrous and
terrible delight, the hideous lines that seared the wrinkling forehead
or crawled around the heavy sensual mouth, wondering sometimes which
were the more horrible, the signs of sin or the signs of age.  He would
place his white hands beside the coarse bloated hands of the picture,
and smile.  He mocked the misshapen body and the failing limbs.

There were moments, indeed, at night, when, lying sleepless in his own
delicately scented chamber, or in the sordid room of the little
ill-famed tavern near the docks which, under an assumed name and in
disguise, it was his habit to frequent, he would think of the ruin he
had brought upon his soul with a pity that was all the more poignant
because it was purely selfish.  But moments such as these were rare.
That curiosity about life which Lord Henry had first stirred in him, as
they sat together in the garden of their friend, seemed to increase
with gratification.  The more he knew, the more he desired to know.  He
had mad hungers that grew more ravenous as he fed them.

Yet he was not really reckless, at any rate in his relations to
society.  Once or twice every month during the winter, and on each
Wednesday evening while the season lasted, he would throw open to the
world his beautiful house and have the most celebrated musicians of the
day to charm his guests with the wonders of their art.  His little
dinners, in the settling of which Lord Henry always assisted him, were
noted as much for the careful selection and placing of those invited,
as for the exquisite taste shown in the decoration of the table, with
its subtle symphonic arrangements of exotic flowers, and embroidered
cloths, and antique plate of gold and silver.  Indeed, there were many,
especially among the very young men, who saw, or fancied that they saw,
in Dorian Gray the true realization of a type of which they had often
dreamed in Eton or Oxford days, a type that was to combine something of
the real culture of the scholar with all the grace and distinction and
perfect manner of a citizen of the world.  To them he seemed to be of
the company of those whom Dante describes as having sought to "make
themselves perfect by the worship of beauty."  Like Gautier, he was one
for whom "the visible world existed."

And, certainly, to him life itself was the first, the greatest, of the
arts, and for it all the other arts seemed to be but a preparation.
Fashion, by which what is really fantastic becomes for a moment
universal, and dandyism, which, in its own way, is an attempt to assert
the absolute modernity of beauty, had, of course, their fascination for
him.  His mode of dressing, and the particular styles that from time to
time he affected, had their marked influence on the young exquisites of
the Mayfair balls and Pall Mall club windows, who copied him in
everything that he did, and tried to reproduce the accidental charm of
his graceful, though to him only half-serious, fopperies.

For, while he was but too ready to accept the position that was almost
immediately offered to him on his coming of age, and found, indeed, a
subtle pleasure in the thought that he might really become to the
London of his own day what to imperial Neronian Rome the author of the
Satyricon once had been, yet in his inmost heart he desired to be
something more than a mere _arbiter elegantiarum_, to be consulted on the
wearing of a jewel, or the knotting of a necktie, or the conduct of a
cane.  He sought to elaborate some new scheme of life that would have
its reasoned philosophy and its ordered principles, and find in the
spiritualizing of the senses its highest realization.

The worship of the senses has often, and with much justice, been
decried, men feeling a natural instinct of terror about passions and
sensations that seem stronger than themselves, and that they are
conscious of sharing with the less highly organized forms of existence.
But it appeared to Dorian Gray that the true nature of the senses had
never been understood, and that they had remained savage and animal
merely because the world had sought to starve them into submission or
to kill them by pain, instead of aiming at making them elements of a
new spirituality, of which a fine instinct for beauty was to be the
dominant characteristic.  As he looked back upon man moving through
history, he was haunted by a feeling of loss.  So much had been
surrendered! and to such little purpose!  There had been mad wilful
rejections, monstrous forms of self-torture and self-denial, whose
origin was fear and whose result was a degradation infinitely more
terrible than that fancied degradation from which, in their ignorance,
they had sought to escape; Nature, in her wonderful irony, driving out
the anchorite to feed with the wild animals of the desert and giving to
the hermit the beasts of the field as his companions.

Yes:  there was to be, as Lord Henry had prophesied, a new Hedonism
that was to recreate life and to save it from that harsh uncomely
puritanism that is having, in our own day, its curious revival.  It was
to have its service of the intellect, certainly, yet it was never to
accept any theory or system that would involve the sacrifice of any
mode of passionate experience.  Its aim, indeed, was to be experience
itself, and not the fruits of experience, sweet or bitter as they might
be.  Of the asceticism that deadens the senses, as of the vulgar
profligacy that dulls them, it was to know nothing.  But it was to
teach man to concentrate himself upon the moments of a life that is
itself but a moment.

There are few of us who have not sometimes wakened before dawn, either
after one of those dreamless nights that make us almost enamoured of
death, or one of those nights of horror and misshapen joy, when through
the chambers of the brain sweep phantoms more terrible than reality
itself, and instinct with that vivid life that lurks in all grotesques,
and that lends to Gothic art its enduring vitality, this art being, one
might fancy, especially the art of those whose minds have been troubled
with the malady of reverie.  Gradually white fingers creep through the
curtains, and they appear to tremble.  In black fantastic shapes, dumb
shadows crawl into the corners of the room and crouch there.  Outside,
there is the stirring of birds among the leaves, or the sound of men
going forth to their work, or the sigh and sob of the wind coming down
from the hills and wandering round the silent house, as though it
feared to wake the sleepers and yet must needs call forth sleep from
her purple cave.  Veil after veil of thin dusky gauze is lifted, and by
degrees the forms and colours of things are restored to them, and we
watch the dawn remaking the world in its antique pattern.  The wan
mirrors get back their mimic life.  The flameless tapers stand where we
had left them, and beside them lies the half-cut book that we had been
studying, or the wired flower that we had worn at the ball, or the
letter that we had been afraid to read, or that we had read too often.
Nothing seems to us changed.  Out of the unreal shadows of the night
comes back the real life that we had known.  We have to resume it where
we had left off, and there steals over us a terrible sense of the
necessity for the continuance of energy in the same wearisome round of
stereotyped habits, or a wild longing, it may be, that our eyelids
might open some morning upon a world that had been refashioned anew in
the darkness for our pleasure, a world in which things would have fresh
shapes and colours, and be changed, or have other secrets, a world in
which the past would have little or no place, or survive, at any rate,
in no conscious form of obligation or regret, the remembrance even of
joy having its bitterness and the memories of pleasure their pain.

It was the creation of such worlds as these that seemed to Dorian Gray
to be the true object, or amongst the true objects, of life; and in his
search for sensations that would be at once new and delightful, and
possess that element of strangeness that is so essential to romance, he
would often adopt certain modes of thought that he knew to be really
alien to his nature, abandon himself to their subtle influences, and
then, having, as it were, caught their colour and satisfied his
intellectual curiosity, leave them with that curious indifference that
is not incompatible with a real ardour of temperament, and that,
indeed, according to certain modern psychologists, is often a condition
of it.

It was rumoured of him once that he was about to join the Roman
Catholic communion, and certainly the Roman ritual had always a great
attraction for him.  The daily sacrifice, more awful really than all
the sacrifices of the antique world, stirred him as much by its superb
rejection of the evidence of the senses as by the primitive simplicity
of its elements and the eternal pathos of the human tragedy that it
sought to symbolize.  He loved to kneel down on the cold marble
pavement and watch the priest, in his stiff flowered dalmatic, slowly
and with white hands moving aside the veil of the tabernacle, or
raising aloft the jewelled, lantern-shaped monstrance with that pallid
wafer that at times, one would fain think, is indeed the "_panis
caelestis_," the bread of angels, or, robed in the garments of the
Passion of Christ, breaking the Host into the chalice and smiting his
breast for his sins.  The fuming censers that the grave boys, in their
lace and scarlet, tossed into the air like great gilt flowers had their
subtle fascination for him.  As he passed out, he used to look with
wonder at the black confessionals and long to sit in the dim shadow of
one of them and listen to men and women whispering through the worn
grating the true story of their lives.

But he never fell into the error of arresting his intellectual
development by any formal acceptance of creed or system, or of
mistaking, for a house in which to live, an inn that is but suitable
for the sojourn of a night, or for a few hours of a night in which
there are no stars and the moon is in travail.  Mysticism, with its
marvellous power of making common things strange to us, and the subtle
antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for a
season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of
the _Darwinismus_ movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in
tracing the thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the
brain, or some white nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of
the absolute dependence of the spirit on certain physical conditions,
morbid or healthy, normal or diseased.  Yet, as has been said of him
before, no theory of life seemed to him to be of any importance
compared with life itself.  He felt keenly conscious of how barren all
intellectual speculation is when separated from action and experiment.
He knew that the senses, no less than the soul, have their spiritual
mysteries to reveal.

And so he would now study perfumes and the secrets of their
manufacture, distilling heavily scented oils and burning odorous gums
from the East.  He saw that there was no mood of the mind that had not
its counterpart in the sensuous life, and set himself to discover their
true relations, wondering what there was in frankincense that made one
mystical, and in ambergris that stirred one's passions, and in violets
that woke the memory of dead romances, and in musk that troubled the
brain, and in champak that stained the imagination; and seeking often
to elaborate a real psychology of perfumes, and to estimate the several
influences of sweet-smelling roots and scented, pollen-laden flowers;
of aromatic balms and of dark and fragrant woods; of spikenard, that
sickens; of hovenia, that makes men mad; and of aloes, that are said to
be able to expel melancholy from the soul.

At another time he devoted himself entirely to music, and in a long
latticed room, with a vermilion-and-gold ceiling and walls of
olive-green lacquer, he used to give curious concerts in which mad
gipsies tore wild music from little zithers, or grave, yellow-shawled
Tunisians plucked at the strained strings of monstrous lutes, while
grinning Negroes beat monotonously upon copper drums and, crouching
upon scarlet mats, slim turbaned Indians blew through long pipes of
reed or brass and charmed--or feigned to charm--great hooded snakes and
horrible horned adders.  The harsh intervals and shrill discords of
barbaric music stirred him at times when Schubert's grace, and Chopin's
beautiful sorrows, and the mighty harmonies of Beethoven himself, fell
unheeded on his ear.  He collected together from all parts of the world
the strangest instruments that could be found, either in the tombs of
dead nations or among the few savage tribes that have survived contact
with Western civilizations, and loved to touch and try them.  He had
the mysterious _juruparis_ of the Rio Negro Indians, that women are not
allowed to look at and that even youths may not see till they have been
subjected to fasting and scourging, and the earthen jars of the
Peruvians that have the shrill cries of birds, and flutes of human
bones such as Alfonso de Ovalle heard in Chile, and the sonorous green
jaspers that are found near Cuzco and give forth a note of singular
sweetness.  He had painted gourds filled with pebbles that rattled when
they were shaken; the long _clarin_ of the Mexicans, into which the
performer does not blow, but through which he inhales the air; the
harsh _ture_ of the Amazon tribes, that is sounded by the sentinels who
sit all day long in high trees, and can be heard, it is said, at a
distance of three leagues; the _teponaztli_, that has two vibrating
tongues of wood and is beaten with sticks that are smeared with an
elastic gum obtained from the milky juice of plants; the _yotl_-bells of
the Aztecs, that are hung in clusters like grapes; and a huge
cylindrical drum, covered with the skins of great serpents, like the
one that Bernal Diaz saw when he went with Cortes into the Mexican
temple, and of whose doleful sound he has left us so vivid a
description.  The fantastic character of these instruments fascinated
him, and he felt a curious delight in the thought that art, like
Nature, has her monsters, things of bestial shape and with hideous
voices.  Yet, after some time, he wearied of them, and would sit in his
box at the opera, either alone or with Lord Henry, listening in rapt
pleasure to "Tannhauser" and seeing in the prelude to that great work
of art a presentation of the tragedy of his own soul.

On one occasion he took up the study of jewels, and appeared at a
costume ball as Anne de Joyeuse, Admiral of France, in a dress covered
with five hundred and sixty pearls.  This taste enthralled him for
years, and, indeed, may be said never to have left him.  He would often
spend a whole day settling and resettling in their cases the various
stones that he had collected, such as the olive-green chrysoberyl that
turns red by lamplight, the cymophane with its wirelike line of silver,
the pistachio-coloured peridot, rose-pink and wine-yellow topazes,
carbuncles of fiery scarlet with tremulous, four-rayed stars, flame-red
cinnamon-stones, orange and violet spinels, and amethysts with their
alternate layers of ruby and sapphire.  He loved the red gold of the
sunstone, and the moonstone's pearly whiteness, and the broken rainbow
of the milky opal.  He procured from Amsterdam three emeralds of
extraordinary size and richness of colour, and had a turquoise _de la
vieille roche_ that was the envy of all the connoisseurs.

He discovered wonderful stories, also, about jewels.  In Alphonso's
Clericalis Disciplina a serpent was mentioned with eyes of real
jacinth, and in the romantic history of Alexander, the Conqueror of
Emathia was said to have found in the vale of Jordan snakes "with
collars of real emeralds growing on their backs." There was a gem in
the brain of the dragon, Philostratus told us, and "by the exhibition
of golden letters and a scarlet robe" the monster could be thrown into
a magical sleep and slain.  According to the great alchemist, Pierre de
Boniface, the diamond rendered a man invisible, and the agate of India
made him eloquent.  The cornelian appeased anger, and the hyacinth
provoked sleep, and the amethyst drove away the fumes of wine.  The
garnet cast out demons, and the hydropicus deprived the moon of her
colour.  The selenite waxed and waned with the moon, and the meloceus,
that discovers thieves, could be affected only by the blood of kids.
Leonardus Camillus had seen a white stone taken from the brain of a
newly killed toad, that was a certain antidote against poison.  The
bezoar, that was found in the heart of the Arabian deer, was a charm
that could cure the plague.  In the nests of Arabian birds was the
aspilates, that, according to Democritus, kept the wearer from any
danger by fire.

The King of Ceilan rode through his city with a large ruby in his hand,
as the ceremony of his coronation.  The gates of the palace of John the
Priest were "made of sardius, with the horn of the horned snake
inwrought, so that no man might bring poison within." Over the gable
were "two golden apples, in which were two carbuncles," so that the
gold might shine by day and the carbuncles by night.  In Lodge's
strange romance 'A Margarite of America', it was stated that in the
chamber of the queen one could behold "all the chaste ladies of the
world, inchased out of silver, looking through fair mirrours of
chrysolites, carbuncles, sapphires, and greene emeraults." Marco Polo
had seen the inhabitants of Zipangu place rose-coloured pearls in the
mouths of the dead.  A sea-monster had been enamoured of the pearl that
the diver brought to King Perozes, and had slain the thief, and mourned
for seven moons over its loss.  When the Huns lured the king into the
great pit, he flung it away--Procopius tells the story--nor was it ever
found again, though the Emperor Anastasius offered five hundred-weight
of gold pieces for it.  The King of Malabar had shown to a certain
Venetian a rosary of three hundred and four pearls, one for every god
that he worshipped.

When the Duke de Valentinois, son of Alexander VI, visited Louis XII of
France, his horse was loaded with gold leaves, according to Brantome,
and his cap had double rows of rubies that threw out a great light.
Charles of England had ridden in stirrups hung with four hundred and
twenty-one diamonds.  Richard II had a coat, valued at thirty thousand
marks, which was covered with balas rubies.  Hall described Henry VIII,
on his way to the Tower previous to his coronation, as wearing "a
jacket of raised gold, the placard embroidered with diamonds and other
rich stones, and a great bauderike about his neck of large balasses."
The favourites of James I wore ear-rings of emeralds set in gold
filigrane.  Edward II gave to Piers Gaveston a suit of red-gold armour
studded with jacinths, a collar of gold roses set with
turquoise-stones, and a skull-cap _parseme_ with pearls.  Henry II wore
jewelled gloves reaching to the elbow, and had a hawk-glove sewn with
twelve rubies and fifty-two great orients.  The ducal hat of Charles
the Rash, the last Duke of Burgundy of his race, was hung with
pear-shaped pearls and studded with sapphires.

How exquisite life had once been!  How gorgeous in its pomp and
decoration!  Even to read of the luxury of the dead was wonderful.

Then he turned his attention to embroideries and to the tapestries that
performed the office of frescoes in the chill rooms of the northern
nations of Europe.  As he investigated the subject--and he always had
an extraordinary faculty of becoming absolutely absorbed for the moment
in whatever he took up--he was almost saddened by the reflection of the
ruin that time brought on beautiful and wonderful things.  He, at any
rate, had escaped that.  Summer followed summer, and the yellow
jonquils bloomed and died many times, and nights of horror repeated the
story of their shame, but he was unchanged.  No winter marred his face
or stained his flowerlike bloom.  How different it was with material
things!  Where had they passed to?  Where was the great crocus-coloured
robe, on which the gods fought against the giants, that had been worked
by brown girls for the pleasure of Athena?  Where the huge velarium
that Nero had stretched across the Colosseum at Rome, that Titan sail
of purple on which was represented the starry sky, and Apollo driving a
chariot drawn by white, gilt-reined steeds?  He longed to see the
curious table-napkins wrought for the Priest of the Sun, on which were
displayed all the dainties and viands that could be wanted for a feast;
the mortuary cloth of King Chilperic, with its three hundred golden
bees; the fantastic robes that excited the indignation of the Bishop of
Pontus and were figured with "lions, panthers, bears, dogs, forests,
rocks, hunters--all, in fact, that a painter can copy from nature"; and
the coat that Charles of Orleans once wore, on the sleeves of which
were embroidered the verses of a song beginning "_Madame, je suis tout
joyeux_," the musical accompaniment of the words being wrought in gold
thread, and each note, of square shape in those days, formed with four
pearls.  He read of the room that was prepared at the palace at Rheims
for the use of Queen Joan of Burgundy and was decorated with "thirteen
hundred and twenty-one parrots, made in broidery, and blazoned with the
king's arms, and five hundred and sixty-one butterflies, whose wings
were similarly ornamented with the arms of the queen, the whole worked
in gold."  Catherine de Medicis had a mourning-bed made for her of
black velvet powdered with crescents and suns.  Its curtains were of
damask, with leafy wreaths and garlands, figured upon a gold and silver
ground, and fringed along the edges with broideries of pearls, and it
stood in a room hung with rows of the queen's devices in cut black
velvet upon cloth of silver.  Louis XIV had gold embroidered caryatides
fifteen feet high in his apartment.  The state bed of Sobieski, King of
Poland, was made of Smyrna gold brocade embroidered in turquoises with
verses from the Koran.  Its supports were of silver gilt, beautifully
chased, and profusely set with enamelled and jewelled medallions.  It
had been taken from the Turkish camp before Vienna, and the standard of
Mohammed had stood beneath the tremulous gilt of its canopy.

And so, for a whole year, he sought to accumulate the most exquisite
specimens that he could find of textile and embroidered work, getting
the dainty Delhi muslins, finely wrought with gold-thread palmates and
stitched over with iridescent beetles' wings; the Dacca gauzes, that
from their transparency are known in the East as "woven air," and
"running water," and "evening dew"; strange figured cloths from Java;
elaborate yellow Chinese hangings; books bound in tawny satins or fair
blue silks and wrought with _fleurs-de-lis_, birds and images; veils of
_lacis_ worked in Hungary point; Sicilian brocades and stiff Spanish
velvets; Georgian work, with its gilt coins, and Japanese _Foukousas_,
with their green-toned golds and their marvellously plumaged birds.

He had a special passion, also, for ecclesiastical vestments, as indeed
he had for everything connected with the service of the Church.  In the
long cedar chests that lined the west gallery of his house, he had
stored away many rare and beautiful specimens of what is really the
raiment of the Bride of Christ, who must wear purple and jewels and
fine linen that she may hide the pallid macerated body that is worn by
the suffering that she seeks for and wounded by self-inflicted pain.
He possessed a gorgeous cope of crimson silk and gold-thread damask,
figured with a repeating pattern of golden pomegranates set in
six-petalled formal blossoms, beyond which on either side was the
pine-apple device wrought in seed-pearls. The orphreys were divided
into panels representing scenes from the life of the Virgin, and the
coronation of the Virgin was figured in coloured silks upon the hood.
This was Italian work of the fifteenth century.  Another cope was of
green velvet, embroidered with heart-shaped groups of acanthus-leaves,
from which spread long-stemmed white blossoms, the details of which
were picked out with silver thread and coloured crystals.  The morse
bore a seraph's head in gold-thread raised work.  The orphreys were
woven in a diaper of red and gold silk, and were starred with
medallions of many saints and martyrs, among whom was St. Sebastian.
He had chasubles, also, of amber-coloured silk, and blue silk and gold
brocade, and yellow silk damask and cloth of gold, figured with
representations of the Passion and Crucifixion of Christ, and
embroidered with lions and peacocks and other emblems; dalmatics of
white satin and pink silk damask, decorated with tulips and dolphins
and _fleurs-de-lis_; altar frontals of crimson velvet and blue linen; and
many corporals, chalice-veils, and sudaria.  In the mystic offices to
which such things were put, there was something that quickened his
imagination.

For these treasures, and everything that he collected in his lovely
house, were to be to him means of forgetfulness, modes by which he
could escape, for a season, from the fear that seemed to him at times
to be almost too great to be borne.  Upon the walls of the lonely
locked room where he had spent so much of his boyhood, he had hung with
his own hands the terrible portrait whose changing features showed him
the real degradation of his life, and in front of it had draped the
purple-and-gold pall as a curtain.  For weeks he would not go there,
would forget the hideous painted thing, and get back his light heart,
his wonderful joyousness, his passionate absorption in mere existence.
Then, suddenly, some night he would creep out of the house, go down to
dreadful places near Blue Gate Fields, and stay there, day after day,
until he was driven away.  On his return he would sit in front of the
picture, sometimes loathing it and himself, but filled, at other
times, with that pride of individualism that is half the
fascination of sin, and smiling with secret pleasure at the misshapen
shadow that had to bear the burden that should have been his own.

After a few years he could not endure to be long out of England, and
gave up the villa that he had shared at Trouville with Lord Henry, as
well as the little white walled-in house at Algiers where they had more
than once spent the winter.  He hated to be separated from the picture
that was such a part of his life, and was also afraid that during his
absence some one might gain access to the room, in spite of the
elaborate bars that he had caused to be placed upon the door.

He was quite conscious that this would tell them nothing.  It was true
that the portrait still preserved, under all the foulness and ugliness
of the face, its marked likeness to himself; but what could they learn
from that?  He would laugh at any one who tried to taunt him.  He had
not painted it.  What was it to him how vile and full of shame it
looked?  Even if he told them, would they believe it?

Yet he was afraid.  Sometimes when he was down at his great house in
Nottinghamshire, entertaining the fashionable young men of his own rank
who were his chief companions, and astounding the county by the wanton
luxury and gorgeous splendour of his mode of life, he would suddenly
leave his guests and rush back to town to see that the door had not
been tampered with and that the picture was still there.  What if it
should be stolen?  The mere thought made him cold with horror.  Surely
the world would know his secret then.  Perhaps the world already
suspected it.

For, while he fascinated many, there were not a few who distrusted him.
He was very nearly blackballed at a West End club of which his birth
and social position fully entitled him to become a member, and it was
said that on one occasion, when he was brought by a friend into the
smoking-room of the Churchill, the Duke of Berwick and another
gentleman got up in a marked manner and went out.  Curious stories
became current about him after he had passed his twenty-fifth year.  It
was rumoured that he had been seen brawling with foreign sailors in a
low den in the distant parts of Whitechapel, and that he consorted with
thieves and coiners and knew the mysteries of their trade.  His
extraordinary absences became notorious, and, when he used to reappear
again in society, men would whisper to each other in corners, or pass
him with a sneer, or look at him with cold searching eyes, as though
they were determined to discover his secret.

Of such insolences and attempted slights he, of course, took no notice,
and in the opinion of most people his frank debonair manner, his
charming boyish smile, and the infinite grace of that wonderful youth
that seemed never to leave him, were in themselves a sufficient answer
to the calumnies, for so they termed them, that were circulated about
him.  It was remarked, however, that some of those who had been most
intimate with him appeared, after a time, to shun him.  Women who had
wildly adored him, and for his sake had braved all social censure and
set convention at defiance, were seen to grow pallid with shame or
horror if Dorian Gray entered the room.

Yet these whispered scandals only increased in the eyes of many his
strange and dangerous charm.  His great wealth was a certain element of
security.  Society--civilized society, at least--is never very ready to
believe anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and
fascinating.  It feels instinctively that manners are of more
importance than morals, and, in its opinion, the highest respectability
is of much less value than the possession of a good _chef_.  And, after
all, it is a very poor consolation to be told that the man who has
given one a bad dinner, or poor wine, is irreproachable in his private
life.  Even the cardinal virtues cannot atone for half-cold _entrees_, as
Lord Henry remarked once, in a discussion on the subject, and there is
possibly a good deal to be said for his view.  For the canons of good
society are, or should be, the same as the canons of art.  Form is
absolutely essential to it.  It should have the dignity of a ceremony,
as well as its unreality, and should combine the insincere character of
a romantic play with the wit and beauty that make such plays delightful
to us.  Is insincerity such a terrible thing?  I think not.  It is
merely a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

Such, at any rate, was Dorian Gray's opinion.  He used to wonder at the
shallow psychology of those who conceive the ego in man as a thing
simple, permanent, reliable, and of one essence.  To him, man was a
being with myriad lives and myriad sensations, a complex multiform
creature that bore within itself strange legacies of thought and
passion, and whose very flesh was tainted with the monstrous maladies
of the dead.  He loved to stroll through the gaunt cold picture-gallery
of his country house and look at the various portraits of those whose
blood flowed in his veins.  Here was Philip Herbert, described by
Francis Osborne, in his Memoires on the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and
King James, as one who was "caressed by the Court for his handsome
face, which kept him not long company."  Was it young Herbert's life
that he sometimes led?  Had some strange poisonous germ crept from body
to body till it had reached his own?  Was it some dim sense of that
ruined grace that had made him so suddenly, and almost without cause,
give utterance, in Basil Hallward's studio, to the mad prayer that had
so changed his life?  Here, in gold-embroidered red doublet, jewelled
surcoat, and gilt-edged ruff and wristbands, stood Sir Anthony Sherard,
with his silver-and-black armour piled at his feet.  What had this
man's legacy been?  Had the lover of Giovanna of Naples bequeathed him
some inheritance of sin and shame?  Were his own actions merely the
dreams that the dead man had not dared to realize?  Here, from the
fading canvas, smiled Lady Elizabeth Devereux, in her gauze hood, pearl
stomacher, and pink slashed sleeves.  A flower was in her right hand,
and her left clasped an enamelled collar of white and damask roses.  On
a table by her side lay a mandolin and an apple.  There were large
green rosettes upon her little pointed shoes.  He knew her life, and
the strange stories that were told about her lovers.  Had he something
of her temperament in him?  These oval, heavy-lidded eyes seemed to
look curiously at him.  What of George Willoughby, with his powdered
hair and fantastic patches?  How evil he looked!  The face was
saturnine and swarthy, and the sensual lips seemed to be twisted with
disdain.  Delicate lace ruffles fell over the lean yellow hands that
were so overladen with rings.  He had been a macaroni of the eighteenth
century, and the friend, in his youth, of Lord Ferrars.  What of the
second Lord Beckenham, the companion of the Prince Regent in his
wildest days, and one of the witnesses at the secret marriage with Mrs.
Fitzherbert?  How proud and handsome he was, with his chestnut curls
and insolent pose!  What passions had he bequeathed?  The world had
looked upon him as infamous.  He had led the orgies at Carlton House.
The star of the Garter glittered upon his breast.  Beside him hung the
portrait of his wife, a pallid, thin-lipped woman in black.  Her blood,
also, stirred within him.  How curious it all seemed!  And his mother
with her Lady Hamilton face and her moist, wine-dashed lips--he knew
what he had got from her.  He had got from her his beauty, and his
passion for the beauty of others.  She laughed at him in her loose
Bacchante dress.  There were vine leaves in her hair.  The purple
spilled from the cup she was holding.  The carnations of the painting
had withered, but the eyes were still wonderful in their depth and
brilliancy of colour.  They seemed to follow him wherever he went.

Yet one had ancestors in literature as well as in one's own race,
nearer perhaps in type and temperament, many of them, and certainly
with an influence of which one was more absolutely conscious.  There
were times when it appeared to Dorian Gray that the whole of history
was merely the record of his own life, not as he had lived it in act
and circumstance, but as his imagination had created it for him, as it
had been in his brain and in his passions.  He felt that he had known
them all, those strange terrible figures that had passed across the
stage of the world and made sin so marvellous and evil so full of
subtlety.  It seemed to him that in some mysterious way their lives had
been his own.

The hero of the wonderful novel that had so influenced his life had
himself known this curious fancy.  In the seventh chapter he tells how,
crowned with laurel, lest lightning might strike him, he had sat, as
Tiberius, in a garden at Capri, reading the shameful books of
Elephantis, while dwarfs and peacocks strutted round him and the
flute-player mocked the swinger of the censer; and, as Caligula, had
caroused with the green-shirted jockeys in their stables and supped in
an ivory manger with a jewel-frontleted horse; and, as Domitian, had
wandered through a corridor lined with marble mirrors, looking round
with haggard eyes for the reflection of the dagger that was to end his
days, and sick with that ennui, that terrible _taedium vitae_, that comes
on those to whom life denies nothing; and had peered through a clear
emerald at the red shambles of the circus and then, in a litter of
pearl and purple drawn by silver-shod mules, been carried through the
Street of Pomegranates to a House of Gold and heard men cry on Nero
Caesar as he passed by; and, as Elagabalus, had painted his face with
colours, and plied the distaff among the women, and brought the Moon
from Carthage and given her in mystic marriage to the Sun.

Over and over again Dorian used to read this fantastic chapter, and the
two chapters immediately following, in which, as in some curious
tapestries or cunningly wrought enamels, were pictured the awful and
beautiful forms of those whom vice and blood and weariness had made
monstrous or mad:  Filippo, Duke of Milan, who slew his wife and
painted her lips with a scarlet poison that her lover might suck death
from the dead thing he fondled; Pietro Barbi, the Venetian, known as
Paul the Second, who sought in his vanity to assume the title of
Formosus, and whose tiara, valued at two hundred thousand florins, was
bought at the price of a terrible sin; Gian Maria Visconti, who used
hounds to chase living men and whose murdered body was covered with
roses by a harlot who had loved him; the Borgia on his white horse,
with Fratricide riding beside him and his mantle stained with the blood
of Perotto; Pietro Riario, the young Cardinal Archbishop of Florence,
child and minion of Sixtus IV, whose beauty was equalled only by his
debauchery, and who received Leonora of Aragon in a pavilion of white
and crimson silk, filled with nymphs and centaurs, and gilded a boy
that he might serve at the feast as Ganymede or Hylas; Ezzelin, whose
melancholy could be cured only by the spectacle of death, and who had a
passion for red blood, as other men have for red wine--the son of the
Fiend, as was reported, and one who had cheated his father at dice when
gambling with him for his own soul; Giambattista Cibo, who in mockery
took the name of Innocent and into whose torpid veins the blood of
three lads was infused by a Jewish doctor; Sigismondo Malatesta, the
lover of Isotta and the lord of Rimini, whose effigy was burned at Rome
as the enemy of God and man, who strangled Polyssena with a napkin, and
gave poison to Ginevra d'Este in a cup of emerald, and in honour of a
shameful passion built a pagan church for Christian worship; Charles
VI, who had so wildly adored his brother's wife that a leper had warned
him of the insanity that was coming on him, and who, when his brain had
sickened and grown strange, could only be soothed by Saracen cards
painted with the images of love and death and madness; and, in his
trimmed jerkin and jewelled cap and acanthuslike curls, Grifonetto
Baglioni, who slew Astorre with his bride, and Simonetto with his page,
and whose comeliness was such that, as he lay dying in the yellow
piazza of Perugia, those who had hated him could not choose but weep,
and Atalanta, who had cursed him, blessed him.

There was a horrible fascination in them all.  He saw them at night,
and they troubled his imagination in the day.  The Renaissance knew of
strange manners of poisoning--poisoning by a helmet and a lighted
torch, by an embroidered glove and a jewelled fan, by a gilded pomander
and by an amber chain.  Dorian Gray had been poisoned by a book.  There
were moments when he looked on evil simply as a mode through which he
could realize his conception of the beautiful.





It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth
birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he
had been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold
and foggy.  At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street,
a man passed him in the mist, walking very fast and with the collar of
his grey ulster turned up.  He had a bag in his hand.  Dorian
recognized him.  It was Basil Hallward.  A strange sense of fear, for
which he could not account, came over him.  He made no sign of
recognition and went on quickly in the direction of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him.  Dorian heard him first stopping on the
pavement and then hurrying after him.  In a few moments, his hand was
on his arm.

"Dorian!  What an extraordinary piece of luck!  I have been waiting for
you in your library ever since nine o'clock. Finally I took pity on
your tired servant and told him to go to bed, as he let me out.  I am
off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see
you before I left.  I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as
you passed me.  But I wasn't quite sure.  Didn't you recognize me?"

"In this fog, my dear Basil?  Why, I can't even recognize Grosvenor
Square.  I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel
at all certain about it.  I am sorry you are going away, as I have not
seen you for ages.  But I suppose you will be back soon?"

"No:  I am going to be out of England for six months.  I intend to take
a studio in Paris and shut myself up till I have finished a great
picture I have in my head.  However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to
talk.  Here we are at your door.  Let me come in for a moment.  I have
something to say to you."

"I shall be charmed.  But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray
languidly as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
latch-key.

The lamplight struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his
watch.  "I have heaps of time," he answered.  "The train doesn't go
till twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven.  In fact, I was on my
way to the club to look for you, when I met you.  You see, I shan't
have any delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things.  All I
have with me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty
minutes."

Dorian looked at him and smiled.  "What a way for a fashionable painter
to travel!  A Gladstone bag and an ulster!  Come in, or the fog will
get into the house.  And mind you don't talk about anything serious.
Nothing is serious nowadays.  At least nothing should be."

Hallward shook his head, as he entered, and followed Dorian into the
library.  There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open
hearth.  The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case
stood, with some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on
a little marqueterie table.

"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian.  He gave me
everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes.  He is
a most hospitable creature.  I like him much better than the Frenchman
you used to have.  What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"

Dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "I believe he married Lady Radley's
maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
Anglomania is very fashionable over there now, I hear.  It seems silly
of the French, doesn't it?  But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad
servant.  I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about.  One
often imagines things that are quite absurd.  He was really very
devoted to me and seemed quite sorry when he went away.  Have another
brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take
hock-and-seltzer myself.  There is sure to be some in the next room."

"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap
and coat off and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the
corner.  "And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that.  You make it so much more difficult for me."

"What is it all about?" cried Dorian in his petulant way, flinging
himself down on the sofa.  "I hope it is not about myself.  I am tired
of myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else."

"It is about yourself," answered Hallward in his grave deep voice, "and
I must say it to you.  I shall only keep you half an hour."

Dorian sighed and lit a cigarette.  "Half an hour!" he murmured.

"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own
sake that I am speaking.  I think it right that you should know that
the most dreadful things are being said against you in London."

"I don't wish to know anything about them.  I love scandals about other
people, but scandals about myself don't interest me.  They have not got
the charm of novelty."

"They must interest you, Dorian.  Every gentleman is interested in his
good name.  You don't want people to talk of you as something vile and
degraded.  Of course, you have your position, and your wealth, and all
that kind of thing.  But position and wealth are not everything.  Mind
you, I don't believe these rumours at all.  At least, I can't believe
them when I see you.  Sin is a thing that writes itself across a man's
face.  It cannot be concealed.  People talk sometimes of secret vices.
There are no such things.  If a wretched man has a vice, it shows
itself in the lines of his mouth, the droop of his eyelids, the
moulding of his hands even.  Somebody--I won't mention his name, but
you know him--came to me last year to have his portrait done.  I had
never seen him before, and had never heard anything about him at the
time, though I have heard a good deal since.  He offered an extravagant
price.  I refused him.  There was something in the shape of his fingers
that I hated.  I know now that I was quite right in what I fancied
about him.  His life is dreadful.  But you, Dorian, with your pure,
bright, innocent face, and your marvellous untroubled youth--I can't
believe anything against you.  And yet I see you very seldom, and you
never come down to the studio now, and when I am away from you, and I
hear all these hideous things that people are whispering about you, I
don't know what to say.  Why is it, Dorian, that a man like the Duke of
Berwick leaves the room of a club when you enter it?  Why is it that so
many gentlemen in London will neither go to your house or invite you to
theirs?  You used to be a friend of Lord Staveley.  I met him at dinner
last week.  Your name happened to come up in conversation, in
connection with the miniatures you have lent to the exhibition at the
Dudley.  Staveley curled his lip and said that you might have the most
artistic tastes, but that you were a man whom no pure-minded girl
should be allowed to know, and whom no chaste woman should sit in the
same room with.  I reminded him that I was a friend of yours, and asked
him what he meant.  He told me.  He told me right out before everybody.
It was horrible!  Why is your friendship so fatal to young men?  There
was that wretched boy in the Guards who committed suicide.  You were
his great friend.  There was Sir Henry Ashton, who had to leave England
with a tarnished name.  You and he were inseparable.  What about Adrian
Singleton and his dreadful end?  What about Lord Kent's only son and
his career?  I met his father yesterday in St. James's Street.  He
seemed broken with shame and sorrow.  What about the young Duke of
Perth?  What sort of life has he got now?  What gentleman would
associate with him?"

"Stop, Basil.  You are talking about things of which you know nothing,"
said Dorian Gray, biting his lip, and with a note of infinite contempt
in his voice.  "You ask me why Berwick leaves a room when I enter it.
It is because I know everything about his life, not because he knows
anything about mine.  With such blood as he has in his veins, how could
his record be clean?  You ask me about Henry Ashton and young Perth.
Did I teach the one his vices, and the other his debauchery?  If Kent's
silly son takes his wife from the streets, what is that to me?  If
Adrian Singleton writes his friend's name across a bill, am I his
keeper?  I know how people chatter in England.  The middle classes air
their moral prejudices over their gross dinner-tables, and whisper
about what they call the profligacies of their betters in order to try
and pretend that they are in smart society and on intimate terms with
the people they slander.  In this country, it is enough for a man to
have distinction and brains for every common tongue to wag against him.
And what sort of lives do these people, who pose as being moral, lead
themselves?  My dear fellow, you forget that we are in the native land
of the hypocrite."

"Dorian," cried Hallward, "that is not the question.  England is bad
enough I know, and English society is all wrong.  That is the reason
why I want you to be fine.  You have not been fine.  One has a right to
judge of a man by the effect he has over his friends.  Yours seem to
lose all sense of honour, of goodness, of purity.  You have filled them
with a madness for pleasure.  They have gone down into the depths.  You
led them there.  Yes:  you led them there, and yet you can smile, as
you are smiling now.  And there is worse behind.  I know you and Harry
are inseparable.  Surely for that reason, if for none other, you should
not have made his sister's name a by-word."

"Take care, Basil.  You go too far."

"I must speak, and you must listen.  You shall listen.  When you met
Lady Gwendolen, not a breath of scandal had ever touched her.  Is there
a single decent woman in London now who would drive with her in the
park?  Why, even her children are not allowed to live with her.  Then
there are other stories--stories that you have been seen creeping at
dawn out of dreadful houses and slinking in disguise into the foulest
dens in London.  Are they true?  Can they be true?  When I first heard
them, I laughed.  I hear them now, and they make me shudder.  What
about your country-house and the life that is led there?  Dorian, you
don't know what is said about you.  I won't tell you that I don't want
to preach to you.  I remember Harry saying once that every man who
turned himself into an amateur curate for the moment always began by
saying that, and then proceeded to break his word.  I do want to preach
to you.  I want you to lead such a life as will make the world respect
you.  I want you to have a clean name and a fair record.  I want you to
get rid of the dreadful people you associate with.  Don't shrug your
shoulders like that.  Don't be so indifferent.  You have a wonderful
influence.  Let it be for good, not for evil.  They say that you
corrupt every one with whom you become intimate, and that it is quite
sufficient for you to enter a house for shame of some kind to follow
after.  I don't know whether it is so or not.  How should I know?  But
it is said of you.  I am told things that it seems impossible to doubt.
Lord Gloucester was one of my greatest friends at Oxford.  He showed me
a letter that his wife had written to him when she was dying alone in
her villa at Mentone.  Your name was implicated in the most terrible
confession I ever read.  I told him that it was absurd--that I knew you
thoroughly and that you were incapable of anything of the kind.  Know
you?  I wonder do I know you?  Before I could answer that, I should
have to see your soul."

"To see my soul!" muttered Dorian Gray, starting up from the sofa and
turning almost white from fear.

"Yes," answered Hallward gravely, and with deep-toned sorrow in his
voice, "to see your soul.  But only God can do that."

A bitter laugh of mockery broke from the lips of the younger man.  "You
shall see it yourself, to-night!" he cried, seizing a lamp from the
table.  "Come:  it is your own handiwork.  Why shouldn't you look at
it?  You can tell the world all about it afterwards, if you choose.
Nobody would believe you.  If they did believe you, they would like me
all the better for it.  I know the age better than you do, though you
will prate about it so tediously.  Come, I tell you.  You have
chattered enough about corruption.  Now you shall look on it face to
face."

There was the madness of pride in every word he uttered.  He stamped
his foot upon the ground in his boyish insolent manner.  He felt a
terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his secret,
and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of
all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the
hideous memory of what he had done.

"Yes," he continued, coming closer to him and looking steadfastly into
his stern eyes, "I shall show you my soul.  You shall see the thing
that you fancy only God can see."

Hallward started back.  "This is blasphemy, Dorian!" he cried.  "You
must not say things like that.  They are horrible, and they don't mean
anything."

"You think so?"  He laughed again.

"I know so.  As for what I said to you to-night, I said it for your
good.  You know I have been always a stanch friend to you."

"Don't touch me.  Finish what you have to say."

A twisted flash of pain shot across the painter's face.  He paused for
a moment, and a wild feeling of pity came over him.  After all, what
right had he to pry into the life of Dorian Gray?  If he had done a
tithe of what was rumoured about him, how much he must have suffered!
Then he straightened himself up, and walked over to the fire-place, and
stood there, looking at the burning logs with their frostlike ashes and
their throbbing cores of flame.

"I am waiting, Basil," said the young man in a hard clear voice.

He turned round.  "What I have to say is this," he cried.  "You must
give me some answer to these horrible charges that are made against
you.  If you tell me that they are absolutely untrue from beginning to
end, I shall believe you.  Deny them, Dorian, deny them!  Can't you see
what I am going through?  My God! don't tell me that you are bad, and
corrupt, and shameful."

Dorian Gray smiled.  There was a curl of contempt in his lips.  "Come
upstairs, Basil," he said quietly.  "I keep a diary of my life from day
to day, and it never leaves the room in which it is written.  I shall
show it to you if you come with me."

"I shall come with you, Dorian, if you wish it.  I see I have missed my
train.  That makes no matter.  I can go to-morrow. But don't ask me to
read anything to-night. All I want is a plain answer to my question."

"That shall be given to you upstairs.  I could not give it here.  You
will not have to read long."





He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward
following close behind.  They walked softly, as men do instinctively at
night.  The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall and staircase.  A
rising wind made some of the windows rattle.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian set the lamp down on the
floor, and taking out the key, turned it in the lock.  "You insist on
knowing, Basil?" he asked in a low voice.

"Yes."

"I am delighted," he answered, smiling.  Then he added, somewhat
harshly, "You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know
everything about me.  You have had more to do with my life than you
think"; and, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.  A
cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in
a flame of murky orange.  He shuddered.  "Shut the door behind you," he
whispered, as he placed the lamp on the table.

Hallward glanced round him with a puzzled expression.  The room looked
as if it had not been lived in for years.  A faded Flemish tapestry, a
curtained picture, an old Italian _cassone_, and an almost empty
book-case--that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and
a table.  As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was
standing on the mantelshelf, he saw that the whole place was covered
with dust and that the carpet was in holes.  A mouse ran scuffling
behind the wainscoting.  There was a damp odour of mildew.

"So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?  Draw that
curtain back, and you will see mine."

The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.  "You are mad, Dorian, or
playing a part," muttered Hallward, frowning.

"You won't? Then I must do it myself," said the young man, and he tore
the curtain from its rod and flung it on the ground.

An exclamation of horror broke from the painter's lips as he saw in the
dim light the hideous face on the canvas grinning at him.  There was
something in its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing.
Good heavens! it was Dorian Gray's own face that he was looking at!
The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely spoiled that
marvellous beauty.  There was still some gold in the thinning hair and
some scarlet on the sensual mouth.  The sodden eyes had kept something
of the loveliness of their blue, the noble curves had not yet
completely passed away from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat.
Yes, it was Dorian himself.  But who had done it?  He seemed to
recognize his own brushwork, and the frame was his own design.  The
idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.  He seized the lighted candle,
and held it to the picture.  In the left-hand corner was his own name,
traced in long letters of bright vermilion.

It was some foul parody, some infamous ignoble satire.  He had never
done that.  Still, it was his own picture.  He knew it, and he felt as
if his blood had changed in a moment from fire to sluggish ice.  His
own picture!  What did it mean?  Why had it altered?  He turned and
looked at Dorian Gray with the eyes of a sick man.  His mouth twitched,
and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate.  He passed his hand
across his forehead.  It was dank with clammy sweat.

The young man was leaning against the mantelshelf, watching him with
that strange expression that one sees on the faces of those who are
absorbed in a play when some great artist is acting.  There was neither
real sorrow in it nor real joy.  There was simply the passion of the
spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in his eyes.  He had taken
the flower out of his coat, and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.

"What does this mean?" cried Hallward, at last.  His own voice sounded
shrill and curious in his ears.

"Years ago, when I was a boy," said Dorian Gray, crushing the flower in
his hand, "you met me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my
good looks.  One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who
explained to me the wonder of youth, and you finished a portrait of me
that revealed to me the wonder of beauty.  In a mad moment that, even
now, I don't know whether I regret or not, I made a wish, perhaps you
would call it a prayer...."

"I remember it!  Oh, how well I remember it!  No! the thing is
impossible.  The room is damp.  Mildew has got into the canvas.  The
paints I used had some wretched mineral poison in them.  I tell you the
thing is impossible."

"Ah, what is impossible?" murmured the young man, going over to the
window and leaning his forehead against the cold, mist-stained glass.

"You told me you had destroyed it."

"I was wrong.  It has destroyed me."

"I don't believe it is my picture."

"Can't you see your ideal in it?" said Dorian bitterly.

"My ideal, as you call it..."

"As you called it."

"There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.  You were to me such
an ideal as I shall never meet again.  This is the face of a satyr."

"It is the face of my soul."

"Christ! what a thing I must have worshipped!  It has the eyes of a
devil."

"Each of us has heaven and hell in him, Basil," cried Dorian with a
wild gesture of despair.

Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.  "My God!  If it
is true," he exclaimed, "and this is what you have done with your life,
why, you must be worse even than those who talk against you fancy you
to be!" He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it.  The
surface seemed to be quite undisturbed and as he had left it.  It was
from within, apparently, that the foulness and horror had come.
Through some strange quickening of inner life the leprosies of sin were
slowly eating the thing away.  The rotting of a corpse in a watery
grave was not so fearful.

His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and
lay there sputtering.  He placed his foot on it and put it out.  Then
he flung himself into the rickety chair that was standing by the table
and buried his face in his hands.

"Good God, Dorian, what a lesson!  What an awful lesson!" There was no
answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.  "Pray,
Dorian, pray," he murmured.  "What is it that one was taught to say in
one's boyhood?  'Lead us not into temptation.  Forgive us our sins.
Wash away our iniquities.'  Let us say that together.  The prayer of
your pride has been answered.  The prayer of your repentance will be
answered also.  I worshipped you too much.  I am punished for it.  You
worshipped yourself too much.  We are both punished."

Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed
eyes.  "It is too late, Basil," he faltered.

"It is never too late, Dorian.  Let us kneel down and try if we cannot
remember a prayer.  Isn't there a verse somewhere, 'Though your sins be
as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow'?"

"Those words mean nothing to me now."

"Hush!  Don't say that.  You have done enough evil in your life.  My
God!  Don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?"

Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and suddenly an uncontrollable
feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him, as though it had
been suggested to him by the image on the canvas, whispered into his
ear by those grinning lips.  The mad passions of a hunted animal
stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table,
more than in his whole life he had ever loathed anything.  He glanced
wildly around.  Something glimmered on the top of the painted chest
that faced him.  His eye fell on it.  He knew what it was.  It was a
knife that he had brought up, some days before, to cut a piece of cord,
and had forgotten to take away with him.  He moved slowly towards it,
passing Hallward as he did so.  As soon as he got behind him, he seized
it and turned round.  Hallward stirred in his chair as if he was going
to rise.  He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that
is behind the ear, crushing the man's head down on the table and
stabbing again and again.

There was a stifled groan and the horrible sound of some one choking
with blood.  Three times the outstretched arms shot up convulsively,
waving grotesque, stiff-fingered hands in the air.  He stabbed him
twice more, but the man did not move.  Something began to trickle on
the floor.  He waited for a moment, still pressing the head down.  Then
he threw the knife on the table, and listened.

He could hear nothing, but the drip, drip on the threadbare carpet.  He
opened the door and went out on the landing.  The house was absolutely
quiet.  No one was about.  For a few seconds he stood bending over the
balustrade and peering down into the black seething well of darkness.
Then he took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in
as he did so.

The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with
bowed head, and humped back, and long fantastic arms.  Had it not been
for the red jagged tear in the neck and the clotted black pool that was
slowly widening on the table, one would have said that the man was
simply asleep.

How quickly it had all been done!  He felt strangely calm, and walking
over to the window, opened it and stepped out on the balcony.  The wind
had blown the fog away, and the sky was like a monstrous peacock's
tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes.  He looked down and saw the
policeman going his rounds and flashing the long beam of his lantern on
the doors of the silent houses.  The crimson spot of a prowling hansom
gleamed at the corner and then vanished.  A woman in a fluttering shawl
was creeping slowly by the railings, staggering as she went.  Now and
then she stopped and peered back.  Once, she began to sing in a hoarse
voice.  The policeman strolled over and said something to her.  She
stumbled away, laughing.  A bitter blast swept across the square.  The
gas-lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their
black iron branches to and fro.  He shivered and went back, closing the
window behind him.

Having reached the door, he turned the key and opened it.  He did not
even glance at the murdered man.  He felt that the secret of the whole
thing was not to realize the situation.  The friend who had painted the
fatal portrait to which all his misery had been due had gone out of his
life.  That was enough.

Then he remembered the lamp.  It was a rather curious one of Moorish
workmanship, made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished
steel, and studded with coarse turquoises.  Perhaps it might be missed
by his servant, and questions would be asked.  He hesitated for a
moment, then he turned back and took it from the table.  He could not
help seeing the dead thing.  How still it was!  How horribly white the
long hands looked!  It was like a dreadful wax image.

Having locked the door behind him, he crept quietly downstairs.  The
woodwork creaked and seemed to cry out as if in pain.  He stopped
several times and waited.  No:  everything was still.  It was merely
the sound of his own footsteps.

When he reached the library, he saw the bag and coat in the corner.
They must be hidden away somewhere.  He unlocked a secret press that
was in the wainscoting, a press in which he kept his own curious
disguises, and put them into it.  He could easily burn them afterwards.
Then he pulled out his watch.  It was twenty minutes to two.

He sat down and began to think.  Every year--every month, almost--men
were strangled in England for what he had done.  There had been a
madness of murder in the air.  Some red star had come too close to the
earth.... And yet, what evidence was there against him?  Basil Hallward
had left the house at eleven.  No one had seen him come in again.  Most
of the servants were at Selby Royal.  His valet had gone to bed....
Paris!  Yes.  It was to Paris that Basil had gone, and by the midnight
train, as he had intended.  With his curious reserved habits, it would
be months before any suspicions would be roused.  Months!  Everything
could be destroyed long before then.

A sudden thought struck him.  He put on his fur coat and hat and went
out into the hall.  There he paused, hearing the slow heavy tread of
the policeman on the pavement outside and seeing the flash of the
bull's-eye reflected in the window.  He waited and held his breath.

After a few moments he drew back the latch and slipped out, shutting
the door very gently behind him.  Then he began ringing the bell.  In
about five minutes his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very
drowsy.

"I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis," he said, stepping in;
"but I had forgotten my latch-key. What time is it?"

"Ten minutes past two, sir," answered the man, looking at the clock and
blinking.

"Ten minutes past two?  How horribly late!  You must wake me at nine
to-morrow. I have some work to do."

"All right, sir."

"Did any one call this evening?"

"Mr. Hallward, sir.  He stayed here till eleven, and then he went away
to catch his train."

"Oh!  I am sorry I didn't see him.  Did he leave any message?"

"No, sir, except that he would write to you from Paris, if he did not
find you at the club."

"That will do, Francis.  Don't forget to call me at nine to-morrow."

"No, sir."

The man shambled down the passage in his slippers.

Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the table and passed into the
library.  For a quarter of an hour he walked up and down the room,
biting his lip and thinking.  Then he took down the Blue Book from one
of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.  "Alan Campbell, 152,
Hertford Street, Mayfair."  Yes; that was the man he wanted.





At nine o'clock the next morning his servant came in with a cup of
chocolate on a tray and opened the shutters.  Dorian was sleeping quite
peacefully, lying on his right side, with one hand underneath his
cheek.  He looked like a boy who had been tired out with play, or study.

The man had to touch him twice on the shoulder before he woke, and as
he opened his eyes a faint smile passed across his lips, as though he
had been lost in some delightful dream.  Yet he had not dreamed at all.
His night had been untroubled by any images of pleasure or of pain.
But youth smiles without any reason.  It is one of its chiefest charms.

He turned round, and leaning upon his elbow, began to sip his
chocolate.  The mellow November sun came streaming into the room.  The
sky was bright, and there was a genial warmth in the air.  It was
almost like a morning in May.

Gradually the events of the preceding night crept with silent,
blood-stained feet into his brain and reconstructed themselves there
with terrible distinctness.  He winced at the memory of all that he had
suffered, and for a moment the same curious feeling of loathing for
Basil Hallward that had made him kill him as he sat in the chair came
back to him, and he grew cold with passion.  The dead man was still
sitting there, too, and in the sunlight now.  How horrible that was!
Such hideous things were for the darkness, not for the day.

He felt that if he brooded on what he had gone through he would sicken
or grow mad.  There were sins whose fascination was more in the memory
than in the doing of them, strange triumphs that gratified the pride
more than the passions, and gave to the intellect a quickened sense of
joy, greater than any joy they brought, or could ever bring, to the
senses.  But this was not one of them.  It was a thing to be driven out
of the mind, to be drugged with poppies, to be strangled lest it might
strangle one itself.

When the half-hour struck, he passed his hand across his forehead, and
then got up hastily and dressed himself with even more than his usual
care, giving a good deal of attention to the choice of his necktie and
scarf-pin and changing his rings more than once.  He spent a long time
also over breakfast, tasting the various dishes, talking to his valet
about some new liveries that he was thinking of getting made for the
servants at Selby, and going through his correspondence.  At some of
the letters, he smiled.  Three of them bored him.  One he read several
times over and then tore up with a slight look of annoyance in his
face.  "That awful thing, a woman's memory!" as Lord Henry had once
said.

After he had drunk his cup of black coffee, he wiped his lips slowly
with a napkin, motioned to his servant to wait, and going over to the
table, sat down and wrote two letters.  One he put in his pocket, the
other he handed to the valet.

"Take this round to 152, Hertford Street, Francis, and if Mr. Campbell
is out of town, get his address."

As soon as he was alone, he lit a cigarette and began sketching upon a
piece of paper, drawing first flowers and bits of architecture, and
then human faces.  Suddenly he remarked that every face that he drew
seemed to have a fantastic likeness to Basil Hallward.  He frowned, and
getting up, went over to the book-case and took out a volume at hazard.
He was determined that he would not think about what had happened until
it became absolutely necessary that he should do so.

When he had stretched himself on the sofa, he looked at the title-page
of the book.  It was Gautier's Emaux et Camees, Charpentier's
Japanese-paper edition, with the Jacquemart etching.  The binding was
of citron-green leather, with a design of gilt trellis-work and dotted
pomegranates.  It had been given to him by Adrian Singleton.  As he
turned over the pages, his eye fell on the poem about the hand of
Lacenaire, the cold yellow hand "_du supplice encore mal lavee_," with
its downy red hairs and its "_doigts de faune_."  He glanced at his own
white taper fingers, shuddering slightly in spite of himself, and
passed on, till he came to those lovely stanzas upon Venice:

     Sur une gamme chromatique,
       Le sein de peries ruisselant,
     La Venus de l'Adriatique
       Sort de l'eau son corps rose et blanc.

     Les domes, sur l'azur des ondes
       Suivant la phrase au pur contour,
     S'enflent comme des gorges rondes
       Que souleve un soupir d'amour.

     L'esquif aborde et me depose,
       Jetant son amarre au pilier,
     Devant une facade rose,
       Sur le marbre d'un escalier.


How exquisite they were!  As one read them, one seemed to be floating
down the green water-ways of the pink and pearl city, seated in a black
gondola with silver prow and trailing curtains.  The mere lines looked
to him like those straight lines of turquoise-blue that follow one as
one pushes out to the Lido.  The sudden flashes of colour reminded him
of the gleam of the opal-and-iris-throated birds that flutter round the
tall honeycombed Campanile, or stalk, with such stately grace, through
the dim, dust-stained arcades.  Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he
kept saying over and over to himself:

     "Devant une facade rose,
        Sur le marbre d'un escalier."

The whole of Venice was in those two lines.  He remembered the autumn
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to
mad delightful follies.  There was romance in every place.  But Venice,
like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true
romantic, background was everything, or almost everything.  Basil had
been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret.  Poor
Basil!  What a horrible way for a man to die!

He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget.  He read
of the swallows that fly in and out of the little _cafe_ at Smyrna where
the Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants
smoke their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he
read of the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of
granite in its lonely sunless exile and longs to be back by the hot,
lotus-covered Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and
white vultures with gilded claws, and crocodiles with small beryl eyes
that crawl over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those
verses which, drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that
curious statue that Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre
charmant_" that couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre.  But after a
time the book fell from his hand.  He grew nervous, and a horrible fit
of terror came over him.  What if Alan Campbell should be out of
England?  Days would elapse before he could come back.  Perhaps he
might refuse to come.  What could he do then?  Every moment was of
vital importance.

They had been great friends once, five years before--almost
inseparable, indeed.  Then the intimacy had come suddenly to an end.
When they met in society now, it was only Dorian Gray who smiled:  Alan
Campbell never did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real
appreciation of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the
beauty of poetry he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian.  His
dominant intellectual passion was for science.  At Cambridge he had
spent a great deal of his time working in the laboratory, and had taken
a good class in the Natural Science Tripos of his year.  Indeed, he was
still devoted to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his
own in which he used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the
annoyance of his mother, who had set her heart on his standing for
Parliament and had a vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up
prescriptions.  He was an excellent musician, however, as well, and
played both the violin and the piano better than most amateurs.  In
fact, it was music that had first brought him and Dorian Gray
together--music and that indefinable attraction that Dorian seemed to
be able to exercise whenever he wished--and, indeed, exercised often
without being conscious of it.  They had met at Lady Berkshire's the
night that Rubinstein played there, and after that used to be always
seen together at the opera and wherever good music was going on.  For
eighteen months their intimacy lasted.  Campbell was always either at
Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square.  To him, as to many others, Dorian
Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful and fascinating in
life.  Whether or not a quarrel had taken place between them no one
ever knew.  But suddenly people remarked that they scarcely spoke when
they met and that Campbell seemed always to go away early from any
party at which Dorian Gray was present.  He had changed, too--was
strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike hearing
music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when he was
called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no time
left in which to practise.  And this was certainly true.  Every day he
seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared once
or twice in some of the scientific reviews in connection with certain
curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for.  Every second he kept
glancing at the clock.  As the minutes went by he became horribly
agitated.  At last he got up and began to pace up and down the room,
looking like a beautiful caged thing.  He took long stealthy strides.
His hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable.  Time seemed to him to be crawling with
feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the
jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice.  He knew what was waiting
for him there; saw it, indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands
his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave.  It was useless.  The
brain had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made
grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,
danced like some foul puppet on a stand and grinned through moving
masks.  Then, suddenly, time stopped for him.  Yes:  that blind,
slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, time being
dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its
grave, and showed it to him.  He stared at it.  Its very horror made
him stone.

At last the door opened and his servant entered.  He turned glazed eyes
upon him.

"Mr. Campbell, sir," said the man.

A sigh of relief broke from his parched lips, and the colour came back
to his cheeks.

"Ask him to come in at once, Francis."  He felt that he was himself
again.  His mood of cowardice had passed away.

The man bowed and retired.  In a few moments, Alan Campbell walked in,
looking very stern and rather pale, his pallor being intensified by his
coal-black hair and dark eyebrows.

"Alan!  This is kind of you.  I thank you for coming."

"I had intended never to enter your house again, Gray.  But you said it
was a matter of life and death."  His voice was hard and cold.  He
spoke with slow deliberation.  There was a look of contempt in the
steady searching gaze that he turned on Dorian.  He kept his hands in
the pockets of his Astrakhan coat, and seemed not to have noticed the
gesture with which he had been greeted.

"Yes:  it is a matter of life and death, Alan, and to more than one
person.  Sit down."

Campbell took a chair by the table, and Dorian sat opposite to him.
The two men's eyes met.  In Dorian's there was infinite pity.  He knew
that what he was going to do was dreadful.

After a strained moment of silence, he leaned across and said, very
quietly, but watching the effect of each word upon the face of him he
had sent for, "Alan, in a locked room at the top of this house, a room
to which nobody but myself has access, a dead man is seated at a table.
He has been dead ten hours now.  Don't stir, and don't look at me like
that.  Who the man is, why he died, how he died, are matters that do
not concern you.  What you have to do is this--"

"Stop, Gray.  I don't want to know anything further.  Whether what you
have told me is true or not true doesn't concern me.  I entirely
decline to be mixed up in your life.  Keep your horrible secrets to
yourself.  They don't interest me any more."

"Alan, they will have to interest you.  This one will have to interest
you.  I am awfully sorry for you, Alan.  But I can't help myself.  You
are the one man who is able to save me.  I am forced to bring you into
the matter.  I have no option.  Alan, you are scientific.  You know
about chemistry and things of that kind.  You have made experiments.
What you have got to do is to destroy the thing that is upstairs--to
destroy it so that not a vestige of it will be left.  Nobody saw this
person come into the house.  Indeed, at the present moment he is
supposed to be in Paris.  He will not be missed for months.  When he is
missed, there must be no trace of him found here.  You, Alan, you must
change him, and everything that belongs to him, into a handful of ashes
that I may scatter in the air."

"You are mad, Dorian."

"Ah!  I was waiting for you to call me Dorian."

"You are mad, I tell you--mad to imagine that I would raise a finger to
help you, mad to make this monstrous confession.  I will have nothing
to do with this matter, whatever it is.  Do you think I am going to
peril my reputation for you?  What is it to me what devil's work you
are up to?"

"It was suicide, Alan."

"I am glad of that.  But who drove him to it?  You, I should fancy."

"Do you still refuse to do this for me?"

"Of course I refuse.  I will have absolutely nothing to do with it.  I
don't care what shame comes on you.  You deserve it all.  I should not
be sorry to see you disgraced, publicly disgraced.  How dare you ask
me, of all men in the world, to mix myself up in this horror?  I should
have thought you knew more about people's characters.  Your friend Lord
Henry Wotton can't have taught you much about psychology, whatever else
he has taught you.  Nothing will induce me to stir a step to help you.
You have come to the wrong man.  Go to some of your friends.  Don't
come to me."

"Alan, it was murder.  I killed him.  You don't know what he had made
me suffer.  Whatever my life is, he had more to do with the making or
the marring of it than poor Harry has had.  He may not have intended
it, the result was the same."

"Murder!  Good God, Dorian, is that what you have come to?  I shall not
inform upon you.  It is not my business.  Besides, without my stirring
in the matter, you are certain to be arrested.  Nobody ever commits a
crime without doing something stupid.  But I will have nothing to do
with it."

"You must have something to do with it.  Wait, wait a moment; listen to
me.  Only listen, Alan.  All I ask of you is to perform a certain
scientific experiment.  You go to hospitals and dead-houses, and the
horrors that you do there don't affect you.  If in some hideous
dissecting-room or fetid laboratory you found this man lying on a
leaden table with red gutters scooped out in it for the blood to flow
through, you would simply look upon him as an admirable subject.  You
would not turn a hair.  You would not believe that you were doing
anything wrong.  On the contrary, you would probably feel that you were
benefiting the human race, or increasing the sum of knowledge in the
world, or gratifying intellectual curiosity, or something of that kind.
What I want you to do is merely what you have often done before.
Indeed, to destroy a body must be far less horrible than what you are
accustomed to work at.  And, remember, it is the only piece of evidence
against me.  If it is discovered, I am lost; and it is sure to be
discovered unless you help me."

"I have no desire to help you.  You forget that.  I am simply
indifferent to the whole thing.  It has nothing to do with me."

"Alan, I entreat you.  Think of the position I am in.  Just before you
came I almost fainted with terror.  You may know terror yourself some
day.  No! don't think of that.  Look at the matter purely from the
scientific point of view.  You don't inquire where the dead things on
which you experiment come from.  Don't inquire now.  I have told you
too much as it is.  But I beg of you to do this.  We were friends once,
Alan."

"Don't speak about those days, Dorian--they are dead."

"The dead linger sometimes.  The man upstairs will not go away.  He is
sitting at the table with bowed head and outstretched arms.  Alan!
Alan!  If you don't come to my assistance, I am ruined.  Why, they will
hang me, Alan!  Don't you understand?  They will hang me for what I
have done."

"There is no good in prolonging this scene.  I absolutely refuse to do
anything in the matter.  It is insane of you to ask me."

"You refuse?"

"Yes."

"I entreat you, Alan."

"It is useless."

The same look of pity came into Dorian Gray's eyes.  Then he stretched
out his hand, took a piece of paper, and wrote something on it.  He
read it over twice, folded it carefully, and pushed it across the
table.  Having done this, he got up and went over to the window.

Campbell looked at him in surprise, and then took up the paper, and
opened it.  As he read it, his face became ghastly pale and he fell
back in his chair.  A horrible sense of sickness came over him.  He
felt as if his heart was beating itself to death in some empty hollow.

After two or three minutes of terrible silence, Dorian turned round and
came and stood behind him, putting his hand upon his shoulder.

"I am so sorry for you, Alan," he murmured, "but you leave me no
alternative.  I have a letter written already.  Here it is.  You see
the address.  If you don't help me, I must send it.  If you don't help
me, I will send it.  You know what the result will be.  But you are
going to help me.  It is impossible for you to refuse now.  I tried to
spare you.  You will do me the justice to admit that.  You were stern,
harsh, offensive.  You treated me as no man has ever dared to treat
me--no living man, at any rate.  I bore it all.  Now it is for me to
dictate terms."

Campbell buried his face in his hands, and a shudder passed through him.

"Yes, it is my turn to dictate terms, Alan.  You know what they are.
The thing is quite simple.  Come, don't work yourself into this fever.
The thing has to be done.  Face it, and do it."

A groan broke from Campbell's lips and he shivered all over.  The
ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece seemed to him to be dividing
time into separate atoms of agony, each of which was too terrible to be
borne.  He felt as if an iron ring was being slowly tightened round his
forehead, as if the disgrace with which he was threatened had already
come upon him.  The hand upon his shoulder weighed like a hand of lead.
It was intolerable.  It seemed to crush him.

"Come, Alan, you must decide at once."

"I cannot do it," he said, mechanically, as though words could alter
things.

"You must.  You have no choice.  Don't delay."

He hesitated a moment.  "Is there a fire in the room upstairs?"

"Yes, there is a gas-fire with asbestos."

"I shall have to go home and get some things from the laboratory."

"No, Alan, you must not leave the house.  Write out on a sheet of
notepaper what you want and my servant will take a cab and bring the
things back to you."

Campbell scrawled a few lines, blotted them, and addressed an envelope
to his assistant.  Dorian took the note up and read it carefully.  Then
he rang the bell and gave it to his valet, with orders to return as
soon as possible and to bring the things with him.

As the hall door shut, Campbell started nervously, and having got up
from the chair, went over to the chimney-piece. He was shivering with a
kind of ague.  For nearly twenty minutes, neither of the men spoke.  A
fly buzzed noisily about the room, and the ticking of the clock was
like the beat of a hammer.

As the chime struck one, Campbell turned round, and looking at Dorian
Gray, saw that his eyes were filled with tears.  There was something in
the purity and refinement of that sad face that seemed to enrage him.
"You are infamous, absolutely infamous!" he muttered.

"Hush, Alan.  You have saved my life," said Dorian.

"Your life?  Good heavens! what a life that is!  You have gone from
corruption to corruption, and now you have culminated in crime.  In
doing what I am going to do--what you force me to do--it is not of your
life that I am thinking."

"Ah, Alan," murmured Dorian with a sigh, "I wish you had a thousandth
part of the pity for me that I have for you." He turned away as he
spoke and stood looking out at the garden.  Campbell made no answer.

After about ten minutes a knock came to the door, and the servant
entered, carrying a large mahogany chest of chemicals, with a long coil
of steel and platinum wire and two rather curiously shaped iron clamps.

"Shall I leave the things here, sir?" he asked Campbell.

"Yes," said Dorian.  "And I am afraid, Francis, that I have another
errand for you.  What is the name of the man at Richmond who supplies
Selby with orchids?"

"Harden, sir."

"Yes--Harden.  You must go down to Richmond at once, see Harden
personally, and tell him to send twice as many orchids as I ordered,
and to have as few white ones as possible.  In fact, I don't want any
white ones.  It is a lovely day, Francis, and Richmond is a very pretty
place--otherwise I wouldn't bother you about it."

"No trouble, sir.  At what time shall I be back?"

Dorian looked at Campbell.  "How long will your experiment take, Alan?"
he said in a calm indifferent voice.  The presence of a third person in
the room seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

Campbell frowned and bit his lip.  "It will take about five hours," he
answered.

"It will be time enough, then, if you are back at half-past seven,
Francis.  Or stay:  just leave my things out for dressing.  You can
have the evening to yourself.  I am not dining at home, so I shall not
want you."

"Thank you, sir," said the man, leaving the room.

"Now, Alan, there is not a moment to be lost.  How heavy this chest is!
I'll take it for you.  You bring the other things."  He spoke rapidly
and in an authoritative manner.  Campbell felt dominated by him.  They
left the room together.

When they reached the top landing, Dorian took out the key and turned
it in the lock.  Then he stopped, and a troubled look came into his
eyes.  He shuddered.  "I don't think I can go in, Alan," he murmured.

"It is nothing to me.  I don't require you," said Campbell coldly.

Dorian half opened the door.  As he did so, he saw the face of his
portrait leering in the sunlight.  On the floor in front of it the torn
curtain was lying.  He remembered that the night before he had
forgotten, for the first time in his life, to hide the fatal canvas,
and was about to rush forward, when he drew back with a shudder.

What was that loathsome red dew that gleamed, wet and glistening, on
one of the hands, as though the canvas had sweated blood?  How horrible
it was!--more horrible, it seemed to him for the moment, than the
silent thing that he knew was stretched across the table, the thing
whose grotesque misshapen shadow on the spotted carpet showed him that
it had not stirred, but was still there, as he had left it.

He heaved a deep breath, opened the door a little wider, and with
half-closed eyes and averted head, walked quickly in, determined that
he would not look even once upon the dead man.  Then, stooping down and
taking up the gold-and-purple hanging, he flung it right over the
picture.

There he stopped, feeling afraid to turn round, and his eyes fixed
themselves on the intricacies of the pattern before him.  He heard
Campbell bringing in the heavy chest, and the irons, and the other
things that he had required for his dreadful work.  He began to wonder
if he and Basil Hallward had ever met, and, if so, what they had
thought of each other.

"Leave me now," said a stern voice behind him.

He turned and hurried out, just conscious that the dead man had been
thrust back into the chair and that Campbell was gazing into a
glistening yellow face.  As he was going downstairs, he heard the key
being turned in the lock.

It was long after seven when Campbell came back into the library.  He
was pale, but absolutely calm.  "I have done what you asked me to do,"
he muttered. "And now, good-bye. Let us never see each other again."

"You have saved me from ruin, Alan.  I cannot forget that," said Dorian
simply.

As soon as Campbell had left, he went upstairs.  There was a horrible
smell of nitric acid in the room.  But the thing that had been sitting
at the table was gone.





That evening, at eight-thirty, exquisitely dressed and wearing a large
button-hole of Parma violets, Dorian Gray was ushered into Lady
Narborough's drawing-room by bowing servants.  His forehead was
throbbing with maddened nerves, and he felt wildly excited, but his
manner as he bent over his hostess's hand was as easy and graceful as
ever.  Perhaps one never seems so much at one's ease as when one has to
play a part.  Certainly no one looking at Dorian Gray that night could
have believed that he had passed through a tragedy as horrible as any
tragedy of our age.  Those finely shaped fingers could never have
clutched a knife for sin, nor those smiling lips have cried out on God
and goodness.  He himself could not help wondering at the calm of his
demeanour, and for a moment felt keenly the terrible pleasure of a
double life.

It was a small party, got up rather in a hurry by Lady Narborough, who
was a very clever woman with what Lord Henry used to describe as the
remains of really remarkable ugliness.  She had proved an excellent
wife to one of our most tedious ambassadors, and having buried her
husband properly in a marble mausoleum, which she had herself designed,
and married off her daughters to some rich, rather elderly men, she
devoted herself now to the pleasures of French fiction, French cookery,
and French _esprit_ when she could get it.

Dorian was one of her especial favourites, and she always told him that
she was extremely glad she had not met him in early life.  "I know, my
dear, I should have fallen madly in love with you," she used to say,
"and thrown my bonnet right over the mills for your sake.  It is most
fortunate that you were not thought of at the time.  As it was, our
bonnets were so unbecoming, and the mills were so occupied in trying to
raise the wind, that I never had even a flirtation with anybody.
However, that was all Narborough's fault.  He was dreadfully
short-sighted, and there is no pleasure in taking in a husband who
never sees anything."

Her guests this evening were rather tedious.  The fact was, as she
explained to Dorian, behind a very shabby fan, one of her married
daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to make
matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her.  "I think it
is most unkind of her, my dear," she whispered.  "Of course I go and
stay with them every summer after I come from Homburg, but then an old
woman like me must have fresh air sometimes, and besides, I really wake
them up.  You don't know what an existence they lead down there.  It is
pure unadulterated country life.  They get up early, because they have
so much to do, and go to bed early, because they have so little to
think about.  There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since
the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently they all fall asleep
after dinner.  You shan't sit next either of them.  You shall sit by me
and amuse me."

Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room.  Yes:
it was certainly a tedious party.  Two of the people he had never seen
before, and the others consisted of Ernest Harrowden, one of those
middle-aged mediocrities so common in London clubs who have no enemies,
but are thoroughly disliked by their friends; Lady Ruxton, an
overdressed woman of forty-seven, with a hooked nose, who was always
trying to get herself compromised, but was so peculiarly plain that to
her great disappointment no one would ever believe anything against
her; Mrs. Erlynne, a pushing nobody, with a delightful lisp and
Venetian-red hair; Lady Alice Chapman, his hostess's daughter, a dowdy
dull girl, with one of those characteristic British faces that, once
seen, are never remembered; and her husband, a red-cheeked,
white-whiskered creature who, like so many of his class, was under the
impression that inordinate joviality can atone for an entire lack of
ideas.

He was rather sorry he had come, till Lady Narborough, looking at the
great ormolu gilt clock that sprawled in gaudy curves on the
mauve-draped mantelshelf, exclaimed:  "How horrid of Henry Wotton to be
so late!  I sent round to him this morning on chance and he promised
faithfully not to disappoint me."

It was some consolation that Harry was to be there, and when the door
opened and he heard his slow musical voice lending charm to some
insincere apology, he ceased to feel bored.

But at dinner he could not eat anything.  Plate after plate went away
untasted.  Lady Narborough kept scolding him for what she called "an
insult to poor Adolphe, who invented the _menu_ specially for you," and
now and then Lord Henry looked across at him, wondering at his silence
and abstracted manner.  From time to time the butler filled his glass
with champagne.  He drank eagerly, and his thirst seemed to increase.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry at last, as the _chaud-froid_ was being handed
round, "what is the matter with you to-night? You are quite out of
sorts."

"I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is
afraid to tell me for fear I should be jealous.  He is quite right.  I
certainly should."

"Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in
love for a whole week--not, in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."

"How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady.
"I really cannot understand it."

"It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl,
Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry.  "She is the one link between us and
your short frocks."

"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry.  But I
remember her very well at Vienna thirty years ago, and how _decolletee_
she was then."

"She is still _decolletee_," he answered, taking an olive in his long
fingers; "and when she is in a very smart gown she looks like an
_edition de luxe_ of a bad French novel.  She is really wonderful, and
full of surprises.  Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary.
When her third husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."

"How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.

"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess.  "But her
third husband, Lord Henry!  You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"

"Certainly, Lady Narborough."

"I don't believe a word of it."

"Well, ask Mr. Gray.  He is one of her most intimate friends."

"Is it true, Mr. Gray?"

"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian.  "I asked her
whether, like Marguerite de Navarre, she had their hearts embalmed and
hung at her girdle.  She told me she didn't, because none of them had
had any hearts at all."

"Four husbands!  Upon my word that is _trop de zele_."

"_Trop d'audace_, I tell her," said Dorian.

"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear.  And what is Ferrol
like?  I don't know him."

"The husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes,"
said Lord Henry, sipping his wine.

Lady Narborough hit him with her fan.  "Lord Henry, I am not at all
surprised that the world says that you are extremely wicked."

"But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows.
"It can only be the next world.  This world and I are on excellent
terms."

"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady,
shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments.  "It is perfectly
monstrous," he said, at last, "the way people go about nowadays saying
things against one behind one's back that are absolutely and entirely
true."

"Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing.  "But really, if you all
worship Madame de Ferrol in this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry
again so as to be in the fashion."

"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.
"You were far too happy.  When a woman marries again, it is because she
detested her first husband.  When a man marries again, it is because he
adored his first wife.  Women try their luck; men risk theirs."

"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.

"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the
rejoinder.  "Women love us for our defects.  If we have enough of them,
they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.  You will never
ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough,
but it is quite true."

"Of course it is true, Lord Henry.  If we women did not love you for
your defects, where would you all be?  Not one of you would ever be
married.  You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors.  Not, however,
that that would alter you much.  Nowadays all the married men live like
bachelors, and all the bachelors like married men."

"_Fin de siecle_," murmured Lord Henry.

"_Fin du globe_," answered his hostess.

"I wish it were _fin du globe_," said Dorian with a sigh.  "Life is a
great disappointment."

"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't
tell me that you have exhausted life.  When a man says that one knows
that life has exhausted him.  Lord Henry is very wicked, and I
sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look
so good.  I must find you a nice wife.  Lord Henry, don't you think
that Mr. Gray should get married?"

"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a
bow.

"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him.  I shall go
through Debrett carefully to-night and draw out a list of all the
eligible young ladies."

"With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.

"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited.  But nothing must be done
in a hurry.  I want it to be what _The Morning Post_ calls a suitable
alliance, and I want you both to be happy."

"What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord
Henry.  "A man can be happy with any woman, as long as he does not love
her."

"Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair
and nodding to Lady Ruxton.  "You must come and dine with me soon
again.  You are really an admirable tonic, much better than what Sir
Andrew prescribes for me.  You must tell me what people you would like
to meet, though.  I want it to be a delightful gathering."

"I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered.
"Or do you think that would make it a petticoat party?"

"I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up.  "A thousand pardons,
my dear Lady Ruxton," she added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your
cigarette."

"Never mind, Lady Narborough.  I smoke a great deal too much.  I am
going to limit myself, for the future."

"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry.  "Moderation is a fatal
thing.  Enough is as bad as a meal.  More than enough is as good as a
feast."

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously.  "You must come and explain that
to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.  It sounds a fascinating theory," she
murmured, as she swept out of the room.

"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal,"
cried Lady Narborough from the door.  "If you do, we are sure to
squabble upstairs."

The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the
table and came up to the top.  Dorian Gray changed his seat and went
and sat by Lord Henry.  Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about
the situation in the House of Commons.  He guffawed at his adversaries.
The word _doctrinaire_--word full of terror to the British
mind--reappeared from time to time between his explosions.  An
alliterative prefix served as an ornament of oratory.  He hoisted the
Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought.  The inherited stupidity of the
race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be
the proper bulwark for society.

A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at
Dorian.

"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked.  "You seemed rather out of
sorts at dinner."

"I am quite well, Harry.  I am tired.  That is all."

"You were charming last night.  The little duchess is quite devoted to
you.  She tells me she is going down to Selby."

"She has promised to come on the twentieth."

"Is Monmouth to be there, too?"

"Oh, yes, Harry."

"He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her.  She is very
clever, too clever for a woman.  She lacks the indefinable charm of
weakness.  It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the image
precious.  Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay.
White porcelain feet, if you like.  They have been through the fire,
and what fire does not destroy, it hardens.  She has had experiences."

"How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.

"An eternity, she tells me.  I believe, according to the peerage, it is
ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have been like eternity,
with time thrown in.  Who else is coming?"

"Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey
Clouston, the usual set.  I have asked Lord Grotrian."

"I like him," said Lord Henry.  "A great many people don't, but I find
him charming.  He atones for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by
being always absolutely over-educated. He is a very modern type."

"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry.  He may have to go to
Monte Carlo with his father."

"Ah! what a nuisance people's people are!  Try and make him come.  By
the way, Dorian, you ran off very early last night.  You left before
eleven.  What did you do afterwards?  Did you go straight home?"

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."

"Did you go to the club?"

"Yes," he answered.  Then he bit his lip.  "No, I don't mean that.  I
didn't go to the club.  I walked about.  I forget what I did.... How
inquisitive you are, Harry!  You always want to know what one has been
doing.  I always want to forget what I have been doing.  I came in at
half-past two, if you wish to know the exact time.  I had left my
latch-key at home, and my servant had to let me in.  If you want any
corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders.  "My dear fellow, as if I cared!
Let us go up to the drawing-room. No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman.
Something has happened to you, Dorian.  Tell me what it is.  You are
not yourself to-night."

"Don't mind me, Harry.  I am irritable, and out of temper.  I shall
come round and see you to-morrow, or next day.  Make my excuses to Lady
Narborough.  I shan't go upstairs.  I shall go home.  I must go home."

"All right, Dorian.  I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time.
The duchess is coming."

"I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room.  As he
drove back to his own house, he was conscious that the sense of terror
he thought he had strangled had come back to him.  Lord Henry's casual
questioning had made him lose his nerve for the moment, and he wanted
his nerve still.  Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed.  He
winced.  He hated the idea of even touching them.

Yet it had to be done.  He realized that, and when he had locked the
door of his library, he opened the secret press into which he had
thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag.  A huge fire was blazing.  He
piled another log on it.  The smell of the singeing clothes and burning
leather was horrible.  It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume
everything.  At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some
Algerian pastilles in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and
forehead with a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started.  His eyes grew strangely bright, and he gnawed
nervously at his underlip.  Between two of the windows stood a large
Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid with ivory and blue
lapis.  He watched it as though it were a thing that could fascinate
and make afraid, as though it held something that he longed for and yet
almost loathed.  His breath quickened.  A mad craving came over him.
He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.  His eyelids drooped till
the long fringed lashes almost touched his cheek.  But he still watched
the cabinet.  At last he got up from the sofa on which he had been
lying, went over to it, and having unlocked it, touched some hidden
spring.  A triangular drawer passed slowly out.  His fingers moved
instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed on something.  It was a
small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer, elaborately wrought,
the sides patterned with curved waves, and the silken cords hung with
round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal threads.  He opened it.
Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the odour curiously heavy and
persistent.

He hesitated for some moments, with a strangely immobile smile upon his
face.  Then shivering, though the atmosphere of the room was terribly
hot, he drew himself up and glanced at the clock.  It was twenty
minutes to twelve.  He put the box back, shutting the cabinet doors as
he did so, and went into his bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air, Dorian Gray,
dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his throat, crept
quietly out of his house.  In Bond Street he found a hansom with a good
horse.  He hailed it and in a low voice gave the driver an address.

The man shook his head.  "It is too far for me," he muttered.

"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian.  "You shall have another if
you drive fast."

"All right, sir," answered the man, "you will be there in an hour," and
after his fare had got in he turned his horse round and drove rapidly
towards the river.





A cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly
in the dripping mist.  The public-houses were just closing, and dim men
and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.  From
some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter.  In others,
drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian
Gray watched with listless eyes the sordid shame of the great city, and
now and then he repeated to himself the words that Lord Henry had said
to him on the first day they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the
senses, and the senses by means of the soul."  Yes, that was the
secret.  He had often tried it, and would try it again now.  There were
opium dens where one could buy oblivion, dens of horror where the
memory of old sins could be destroyed by the madness of sins that were
new.

The moon hung low in the sky like a yellow skull.  From time to time a
huge misshapen cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it.  The
gas-lamps grew fewer, and the streets more narrow and gloomy.  Once the
man lost his way and had to drive back half a mile.  A steam rose from
the horse as it splashed up the puddles.  The sidewindows of the hansom
were clogged with a grey-flannel mist.

"To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses by means of
the soul!"  How the words rang in his ears!  His soul, certainly, was
sick to death.  Was it true that the senses could cure it?  Innocent
blood had been spilled.  What could atone for that?  Ah! for that there
was no atonement; but though forgiveness was impossible, forgetfulness
was possible still, and he was determined to forget, to stamp the thing
out, to crush it as one would crush the adder that had stung one.
Indeed, what right had Basil to have spoken to him as he had done?  Who
had made him a judge over others?  He had said things that were
dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

On and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each
step.  He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him.  His throat burned
and his delicate hands twitched nervously together.  He struck at the
horse madly with his stick.  The driver laughed and whipped up.  He
laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable, and the streets like the black web of some
sprawling spider.  The monotony became unbearable, and as the mist
thickened, he felt afraid.

Then they passed by lonely brickfields.  The fog was lighter here, and
he could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange,
fanlike tongues of fire.  A dog barked as they went by, and far away in
the darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed.  The horse stumbled in a
rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

After some time they left the clay road and rattled again over
rough-paven streets.  Most of the windows were dark, but now and then
fantastic shadows were silhouetted against some lamplit blind.  He
watched them curiously.  They moved like monstrous marionettes and made
gestures like live things.  He hated them.  A dull rage was in his
heart.  As they turned a corner, a woman yelled something at them from
an open door, and two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred
yards.  The driver beat at them with his whip.

It is said that passion makes one think in a circle.  Certainly with
hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian Gray shaped and reshaped
those subtle words that dealt with soul and sense, till he had found in
them the full expression, as it were, of his mood, and justified, by
intellectual approval, passions that without such justification would
still have dominated his temper.  From cell to cell of his brain crept
the one thought; and the wild desire to live, most terrible of all
man's appetites, quickened into force each trembling nerve and fibre.
Ugliness that had once been hateful to him because it made things real,
became dear to him now for that very reason.  Ugliness was the one
reality.  The coarse brawl, the loathsome den, the crude violence of
disordered life, the very vileness of thief and outcast, were more
vivid, in their intense actuality of impression, than all the gracious
shapes of art, the dreamy shadows of song.  They were what he needed
for forgetfulness.  In three days he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top of a dark lane.  Over
the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the houses rose the black
masts of ships.  Wreaths of white mist clung like ghostly sails to the
yards.

"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't it?" he asked huskily through the
trap.

Dorian started and peered round.  "This will do," he answered, and
having got out hastily and given the driver the extra fare he had
promised him, he walked quickly in the direction of the quay.  Here and
there a lantern gleamed at the stern of some huge merchantman.  The
light shook and splintered in the puddles.  A red glare came from an
outward-bound steamer that was coaling.  The slimy pavement looked like
a wet mackintosh.

He hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if he
was being followed.  In about seven or eight minutes he reached a small
shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.  In one of
the top-windows stood a lamp.  He stopped and gave a peculiar knock.

After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the chain being
unhooked.  The door opened quietly, and he went in without saying a
word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself into the
shadow as he passed.  At the end of the hall hung a tattered green
curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed him
in from the street.  He dragged it aside and entered a long low room
which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon. Shrill
flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors that
faced them, were ranged round the walls.  Greasy reflectors of ribbed
tin backed them, making quivering disks of light.  The floor was
covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into mud,
and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor.  Some Malays were
crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and
showing their white teeth as they chattered.  In one corner, with his
head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the
tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two
haggard women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his
coat with an expression of disgust.  "He thinks he's got red ants on
him," laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by.  The man looked at her
in terror and began to whimper.

At the end of the room there was a little staircase, leading to a
darkened chamber.  As Dorian hurried up its three rickety steps, the
heavy odour of opium met him.  He heaved a deep breath, and his
nostrils quivered with pleasure.  When he entered, a young man with
smooth yellow hair, who was bending over a lamp lighting a long thin
pipe, looked up at him and nodded in a hesitating manner.

"You here, Adrian?" muttered Dorian.

"Where else should I be?" he answered, listlessly.  "None of the chaps
will speak to me now."

"I thought you had left England."

"Darlington is not going to do anything.  My brother paid the bill at
last.  George doesn't speak to me either.... I don't care," he added
with a sigh.  "As long as one has this stuff, one doesn't want friends.
I think I have had too many friends."

Dorian winced and looked round at the grotesque things that lay in such
fantastic postures on the ragged mattresses.  The twisted limbs, the
gaping mouths, the staring lustreless eyes, fascinated him.  He knew in
what strange heavens they were suffering, and what dull hells were
teaching them the secret of some new joy.  They were better off than he
was.  He was prisoned in thought.  Memory, like a horrible malady, was
eating his soul away.  From time to time he seemed to see the eyes of
Basil Hallward looking at him.  Yet he felt he could not stay.  The
presence of Adrian Singleton troubled him.  He wanted to be where no
one would know who he was.  He wanted to escape from himself.

"I am going on to the other place," he said after a pause.

"On the wharf?"

"Yes."

"That mad-cat is sure to be there.  They won't have her in this place
now."

Dorian shrugged his shoulders.  "I am sick of women who love one.
Women who hate one are much more interesting.  Besides, the stuff is
better."

"Much the same."

"I like it better.  Come and have something to drink.  I must have
something."

"I don't want anything," murmured the young man.

"Never mind."

Adrian Singleton rose up wearily and followed Dorian to the bar.  A
half-caste, in a ragged turban and a shabby ulster, grinned a hideous
greeting as he thrust a bottle of brandy and two tumblers in front of
them.  The women sidled up and began to chatter.  Dorian turned his
back on them and said something in a low voice to Adrian Singleton.

A crooked smile, like a Malay crease, writhed across the face of one of
the women.  "We are very proud to-night," she sneered.

"For God's sake don't talk to me," cried Dorian, stamping his foot on
the ground.  "What do you want?  Money?  Here it is.  Don't ever talk
to me again."

Two red sparks flashed for a moment in the woman's sodden eyes, then
flickered out and left them dull and glazed.  She tossed her head and
raked the coins off the counter with greedy fingers.  Her companion
watched her enviously.

"It's no use," sighed Adrian Singleton.  "I don't care to go back.
What does it matter?  I am quite happy here."

"You will write to me if you want anything, won't you?" said Dorian,
after a pause.

"Perhaps."

"Good night, then."

"Good night," answered the young man, passing up the steps and wiping
his parched mouth with a handkerchief.

Dorian walked to the door with a look of pain in his face.  As he drew
the curtain aside, a hideous laugh broke from the painted lips of the
woman who had taken his money.  "There goes the devil's bargain!" she
hiccoughed, in a hoarse voice.

"Curse you!" he answered, "don't call me that."

She snapped her fingers.  "Prince Charming is what you like to be
called, ain't it?" she yelled after him.

The drowsy sailor leaped to his feet as she spoke, and looked wildly
round.  The sound of the shutting of the hall door fell on his ear.  He
rushed out as if in pursuit.

Dorian Gray hurried along the quay through the drizzling rain.  His
meeting with Adrian Singleton had strangely moved him, and he wondered
if the ruin of that young life was really to be laid at his door, as
Basil Hallward had said to him with such infamy of insult.  He bit his
lip, and for a few seconds his eyes grew sad.  Yet, after all, what did
it matter to him?  One's days were too brief to take the burden of
another's errors on one's shoulders.  Each man lived his own life and
paid his own price for living it.  The only pity was one had to pay so
often for a single fault.  One had to pay over and over again, indeed.
In her dealings with man, destiny never closed her accounts.

There are moments, psychologists tell us, when the passion for sin, or
for what the world calls sin, so dominates a nature that every fibre of
the body, as every cell of the brain, seems to be instinct with fearful
impulses.  Men and women at such moments lose the freedom of their
will.  They move to their terrible end as automatons move.  Choice is
taken from them, and conscience is either killed, or, if it lives at
all, lives but to give rebellion its fascination and disobedience its
charm.  For all sins, as theologians weary not of reminding us, are
sins of disobedience.  When that high spirit, that morning star of
evil, fell from heaven, it was as a rebel that he fell.

Callous, concentrated on evil, with stained mind, and soul hungry for
rebellion, Dorian Gray hastened on, quickening his step as he went, but
as he darted aside into a dim archway, that had served him often as a
short cut to the ill-famed place where he was going, he felt himself
suddenly seized from behind, and before he had time to defend himself,
he was thrust back against the wall, with a brutal hand round his
throat.

He struggled madly for life, and by a terrible effort wrenched the
tightening fingers away.  In a second he heard the click of a revolver,
and saw the gleam of a polished barrel, pointing straight at his head,
and the dusky form of a short, thick-set man facing him.

"What do you want?" he gasped.

"Keep quiet," said the man.  "If you stir, I shoot you."

"You are mad.  What have I done to you?"

"You wrecked the life of Sibyl Vane," was the answer, "and Sibyl Vane
was my sister.  She killed herself.  I know it.  Her death is at your
door.  I swore I would kill you in return.  For years I have sought
you.  I had no clue, no trace.  The two people who could have described
you were dead.  I knew nothing of you but the pet name she used to call
you.  I heard it to-night by chance.  Make your peace with God, for
to-night you are going to die."

Dorian Gray grew sick with fear.  "I never knew her," he stammered.  "I
never heard of her.  You are mad."

"You had better confess your sin, for as sure as I am James Vane, you
are going to die."  There was a horrible moment.  Dorian did not know
what to say or do.  "Down on your knees!" growled the man.  "I give you
one minute to make your peace--no more.  I go on board to-night for
India, and I must do my job first.  One minute.  That's all."

Dorian's arms fell to his side.  Paralysed with terror, he did not know
what to do.  Suddenly a wild hope flashed across his brain.  "Stop," he
cried.  "How long ago is it since your sister died?  Quick, tell me!"

"Eighteen years," said the man.  "Why do you ask me?  What do years
matter?"

"Eighteen years," laughed Dorian Gray, with a touch of triumph in his
voice.  "Eighteen years!  Set me under the lamp and look at my face!"

James Vane hesitated for a moment, not understanding what was meant.
Then he seized Dorian Gray and dragged him from the archway.

Dim and wavering as was the wind-blown light, yet it served to show him
the hideous error, as it seemed, into which he had fallen, for the face
of the man he had sought to kill had all the bloom of boyhood, all the
unstained purity of youth.  He seemed little more than a lad of twenty
summers, hardly older, if older indeed at all, than his sister had been
when they had parted so many years ago.  It was obvious that this was
not the man who had destroyed her life.

He loosened his hold and reeled back.  "My God! my God!" he cried, "and
I would have murdered you!"

Dorian Gray drew a long breath.  "You have been on the brink of
committing a terrible crime, my man," he said, looking at him sternly.
"Let this be a warning to you not to take vengeance into your own
hands."

"Forgive me, sir," muttered James Vane.  "I was deceived.  A chance
word I heard in that damned den set me on the wrong track."

"You had better go home and put that pistol away, or you may get into
trouble," said Dorian, turning on his heel and going slowly down the
street.

James Vane stood on the pavement in horror.  He was trembling from head
to foot.  After a little while, a black shadow that had been creeping
along the dripping wall moved out into the light and came close to him
with stealthy footsteps.  He felt a hand laid on his arm and looked
round with a start.  It was one of the women who had been drinking at
the bar.

"Why didn't you kill him?" she hissed out, putting haggard face quite
close to his.  "I knew you were following him when you rushed out from
Daly's. You fool!  You should have killed him.  He has lots of money,
and he's as bad as bad."

"He is not the man I am looking for," he answered, "and I want no man's
money.  I want a man's life.  The man whose life I want must be nearly
forty now.  This one is little more than a boy.  Thank God, I have not
got his blood upon my hands."

The woman gave a bitter laugh.  "Little more than a boy!" she sneered.
"Why, man, it's nigh on eighteen years since Prince Charming made me
what I am."

"You lie!" cried James Vane.

She raised her hand up to heaven.  "Before God I am telling the truth,"
she cried.

"Before God?"

"Strike me dumb if it ain't so.  He is the worst one that comes here.
They say he has sold himself to the devil for a pretty face.  It's nigh
on eighteen years since I met him.  He hasn't changed much since then.
I have, though," she added, with a sickly leer.

"You swear this?"

"I swear it," came in hoarse echo from her flat mouth.  "But don't give
me away to him," she whined; "I am afraid of him.  Let me have some
money for my night's lodging."

He broke from her with an oath and rushed to the corner of the street,
but Dorian Gray had disappeared.  When he looked back, the woman had
vanished also.





A week later Dorian Gray was sitting in the conservatory at Selby
Royal, talking to the pretty Duchess of Monmouth, who with her husband,
a jaded-looking man of sixty, was amongst his guests.  It was tea-time,
and the mellow light of the huge, lace-covered lamp that stood on the
table lit up the delicate china and hammered silver of the service at
which the duchess was presiding.  Her white hands were moving daintily
among the cups, and her full red lips were smiling at something that
Dorian had whispered to her.  Lord Henry was lying back in a
silk-draped wicker chair, looking at them.  On a peach-coloured divan
sat Lady Narborough, pretending to listen to the duke's description of
the last Brazilian beetle that he had added to his collection.  Three
young men in elaborate smoking-suits were handing tea-cakes to some of
the women.  The house-party consisted of twelve people, and there were
more expected to arrive on the next day.

"What are you two talking about?" said Lord Henry, strolling over to
the table and putting his cup down.  "I hope Dorian has told you about
my plan for rechristening everything, Gladys.  It is a delightful idea."

"But I don't want to be rechristened, Harry," rejoined the duchess,
looking up at him with her wonderful eyes.  "I am quite satisfied with
my own name, and I am sure Mr. Gray should be satisfied with his."

"My dear Gladys, I would not alter either name for the world.  They are
both perfect.  I was thinking chiefly of flowers.  Yesterday I cut an
orchid, for my button-hole. It was a marvellous spotted thing, as
effective as the seven deadly sins.  In a thoughtless moment I asked
one of the gardeners what it was called.  He told me it was a fine
specimen of _Robinsoniana_, or something dreadful of that kind.  It is a
sad truth, but we have lost the faculty of giving lovely names to
things.  Names are everything.  I never quarrel with actions.  My one
quarrel is with words.  That is the reason I hate vulgar realism in
literature.  The man who could call a spade a spade should be compelled
to use one.  It is the only thing he is fit for."

"Then what should we call you, Harry?" she asked.

"His name is Prince Paradox," said Dorian.

"I recognize him in a flash," exclaimed the duchess.

"I won't hear of it," laughed Lord Henry, sinking into a chair.  "From
a label there is no escape!  I refuse the title."

"Royalties may not abdicate," fell as a warning from pretty lips.

"You wish me to defend my throne, then?"

"Yes."

"I give the truths of to-morrow."

"I prefer the mistakes of to-day," she answered.

"You disarm me, Gladys," he cried, catching the wilfulness of her mood.

"Of your shield, Harry, not of your spear."

"I never tilt against beauty," he said, with a wave of his hand.

"That is your error, Harry, believe me.  You value beauty far too much."

"How can you say that?  I admit that I think that it is better to be
beautiful than to be good.  But on the other hand, no one is more ready
than I am to acknowledge that it is better to be good than to be ugly."

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly sins, then?" cried the duchess.
"What becomes of your simile about the orchid?"

"Ugliness is one of the seven deadly virtues, Gladys.  You, as a good
Tory, must not underrate them.  Beer, the Bible, and the seven deadly
virtues have made our England what she is."

"You don't like your country, then?" she asked.

"I live in it."

"That you may censure it the better."

"Would you have me take the verdict of Europe on it?" he inquired.

"What do they say of us?"

"That Tartuffe has emigrated to England and opened a shop."

"Is that yours, Harry?"

"I give it to you."

"I could not use it.  It is too true."

"You need not be afraid.  Our countrymen never recognize a description."

"They are practical."

"They are more cunning than practical.  When they make up their ledger,
they balance stupidity by wealth, and vice by hypocrisy."

"Still, we have done great things."

"Great things have been thrust on us, Gladys."

"We have carried their burden."

"Only as far as the Stock Exchange."

She shook her head.  "I believe in the race," she cried.

"It represents the survival of the pushing."

"It has development."

"Decay fascinates me more."

"What of art?" she asked.

"It is a malady."

"Love?"

"An illusion."

"Religion?"

"The fashionable substitute for belief."

"You are a sceptic."

"Never!  Scepticism is the beginning of faith."

"What are you?"

"To define is to limit."

"Give me a clue."

"Threads snap.  You would lose your way in the labyrinth."

"You bewilder me.  Let us talk of some one else."

"Our host is a delightful topic.  Years ago he was christened Prince
Charming."

"Ah! don't remind me of that," cried Dorian Gray.

"Our host is rather horrid this evening," answered the duchess,
colouring.  "I believe he thinks that Monmouth married me on purely
scientific principles as the best specimen he could find of a modern
butterfly."

"Well, I hope he won't stick pins into you, Duchess," laughed Dorian.

"Oh! my maid does that already, Mr. Gray, when she is annoyed with me."

"And what does she get annoyed with you about, Duchess?"

"For the most trivial things, Mr. Gray, I assure you.  Usually because
I come in at ten minutes to nine and tell her that I must be dressed by
half-past eight."

"How unreasonable of her!  You should give her warning."

"I daren't, Mr. Gray.  Why, she invents hats for me.  You remember the
one I wore at Lady Hilstone's garden-party?  You don't, but it is nice
of you to pretend that you do.  Well, she made it out of nothing.  All
good hats are made out of nothing."

"Like all good reputations, Gladys," interrupted Lord Henry.  "Every
effect that one produces gives one an enemy.  To be popular one must be
a mediocrity."

"Not with women," said the duchess, shaking her head; "and women rule
the world.  I assure you we can't bear mediocrities.  We women, as some
one says, love with our ears, just as you men love with your eyes, if
you ever love at all."

"It seems to me that we never do anything else," murmured Dorian.

"Ah! then, you never really love, Mr. Gray," answered the duchess with
mock sadness.

"My dear Gladys!" cried Lord Henry.  "How can you say that?  Romance
lives by repetition, and repetition converts an appetite into an art.
Besides, each time that one loves is the only time one has ever loved.
Difference of object does not alter singleness of passion.  It merely
intensifies it.  We can have in life but one great experience at best,
and the secret of life is to reproduce that experience as often as
possible."

"Even when one has been wounded by it, Harry?" asked the duchess after
a pause.

"Especially when one has been wounded by it," answered Lord Henry.

The duchess turned and looked at Dorian Gray with a curious expression
in her eyes.  "What do you say to that, Mr. Gray?" she inquired.

Dorian hesitated for a moment.  Then he threw his head back and
laughed.  "I always agree with Harry, Duchess."

"Even when he is wrong?"

"Harry is never wrong, Duchess."

"And does his philosophy make you happy?"

"I have never searched for happiness.  Who wants happiness?  I have
searched for pleasure."

"And found it, Mr. Gray?"

"Often.  Too often."

The duchess sighed.  "I am searching for peace," she said, "and if I
don't go and dress, I shall have none this evening."

"Let me get you some orchids, Duchess," cried Dorian, starting to his
feet and walking down the conservatory.

"You are flirting disgracefully with him," said Lord Henry to his
cousin.  "You had better take care.  He is very fascinating."

"If he were not, there would be no battle."

"Greek meets Greek, then?"

"I am on the side of the Trojans.  They fought for a woman."

"They were defeated."

"There are worse things than capture," she answered.

"You gallop with a loose rein."

"Pace gives life," was the _riposte_.

"I shall write it in my diary to-night."

"What?"

"That a burnt child loves the fire."

"I am not even singed.  My wings are untouched."

"You use them for everything, except flight."

"Courage has passed from men to women.  It is a new experience for us."

"You have a rival."

"Who?"

He laughed.  "Lady Narborough," he whispered.  "She perfectly adores
him."

"You fill me with apprehension.  The appeal to antiquity is fatal to us
who are romanticists."

"Romanticists!  You have all the methods of science."

"Men have educated us."

"But not explained you."

"Describe us as a sex," was her challenge.

"Sphinxes without secrets."

She looked at him, smiling.  "How long Mr. Gray is!" she said.  "Let us
go and help him.  I have not yet told him the colour of my frock."

"Ah! you must suit your frock to his flowers, Gladys."

"That would be a premature surrender."

"Romantic art begins with its climax."

"I must keep an opportunity for retreat."

"In the Parthian manner?"

"They found safety in the desert.  I could not do that."

"Women are not always allowed a choice," he answered, but hardly had he
finished the sentence before from the far end of the conservatory came
a stifled groan, followed by the dull sound of a heavy fall.  Everybody
started up.  The duchess stood motionless in horror.  And with fear in
his eyes, Lord Henry rushed through the flapping palms to find Dorian
Gray lying face downwards on the tiled floor in a deathlike swoon.

He was carried at once into the blue drawing-room and laid upon one of
the sofas.  After a short time, he came to himself and looked round
with a dazed expression.

"What has happened?" he asked.  "Oh!  I remember.  Am I safe here,
Harry?" He began to tremble.

"My dear Dorian," answered Lord Henry, "you merely fainted.  That was
all.  You must have overtired yourself.  You had better not come down
to dinner.  I will take your place."

"No, I will come down," he said, struggling to his feet.  "I would
rather come down.  I must not be alone."

He went to his room and dressed.  There was a wild recklessness of
gaiety in his manner as he sat at table, but now and then a thrill of
terror ran through him when he remembered that, pressed against the
window of the conservatory, like a white handkerchief, he had seen the
face of James Vane watching him.





The next day he did not leave the house, and, indeed, spent most of the
time in his own room, sick with a wild terror of dying, and yet
indifferent to life itself.  The consciousness of being hunted, snared,
tracked down, had begun to dominate him.  If the tapestry did but
tremble in the wind, he shook.  The dead leaves that were blown against
the leaded panes seemed to him like his own wasted resolutions and wild
regrets.  When he closed his eyes, he saw again the sailor's face
peering through the mist-stained glass, and horror seemed once more to
lay its hand upon his heart.

But perhaps it had been only his fancy that had called vengeance out of
the night and set the hideous shapes of punishment before him.  Actual
life was chaos, but there was something terribly logical in the
imagination.  It was the imagination that set remorse to dog the feet
of sin.  It was the imagination that made each crime bear its misshapen
brood.  In the common world of fact the wicked were not punished, nor
the good rewarded.  Success was given to the strong, failure thrust
upon the weak.  That was all.  Besides, had any stranger been prowling
round the house, he would have been seen by the servants or the
keepers.  Had any foot-marks been found on the flower-beds, the
gardeners would have reported it.  Yes, it had been merely fancy.
Sibyl Vane's brother had not come back to kill him.  He had sailed away
in his ship to founder in some winter sea.  From him, at any rate, he
was safe.  Why, the man did not know who he was, could not know who he
was.  The mask of youth had saved him.

And yet if it had been merely an illusion, how terrible it was to think
that conscience could raise such fearful phantoms, and give them
visible form, and make them move before one!  What sort of life would
his be if, day and night, shadows of his crime were to peer at him from
silent corners, to mock him from secret places, to whisper in his ear
as he sat at the feast, to wake him with icy fingers as he lay asleep!
As the thought crept through his brain, he grew pale with terror, and
the air seemed to him to have become suddenly colder.  Oh! in what a
wild hour of madness he had killed his friend!  How ghastly the mere
memory of the scene!  He saw it all again.  Each hideous detail came
back to him with added horror.  Out of the black cave of time, terrible
and swathed in scarlet, rose the image of his sin.  When Lord Henry
came in at six o'clock, he found him crying as one whose heart will
break.

It was not till the third day that he ventured to go out.  There was
something in the clear, pine-scented air of that winter morning that
seemed to bring him back his joyousness and his ardour for life.  But
it was not merely the physical conditions of environment that had
caused the change.  His own nature had revolted against the excess of
anguish that had sought to maim and mar the perfection of its calm.
With subtle and finely wrought temperaments it is always so.  Their
strong passions must either bruise or bend.  They either slay the man,
or themselves die.  Shallow sorrows and shallow loves live on.  The
loves and sorrows that are great are destroyed by their own plenitude.
Besides, he had convinced himself that he had been the victim of a
terror-stricken imagination, and looked back now on his fears with
something of pity and not a little of contempt.

After breakfast, he walked with the duchess for an hour in the garden
and then drove across the park to join the shooting-party. The crisp
frost lay like salt upon the grass.  The sky was an inverted cup of
blue metal.  A thin film of ice bordered the flat, reed-grown lake.

At the corner of the pine-wood he caught sight of Sir Geoffrey
Clouston, the duchess's brother, jerking two spent cartridges out of
his gun.  He jumped from the cart, and having told the groom to take
the mare home, made his way towards his guest through the withered
bracken and rough undergrowth.

"Have you had good sport, Geoffrey?" he asked.

"Not very good, Dorian.  I think most of the birds have gone to the
open.  I dare say it will be better after lunch, when we get to new
ground."

Dorian strolled along by his side.  The keen aromatic air, the brown
and red lights that glimmered in the wood, the hoarse cries of the
beaters ringing out from time to time, and the sharp snaps of the guns
that followed, fascinated him and filled him with a sense of delightful
freedom.  He was dominated by the carelessness of happiness, by the
high indifference of joy.

Suddenly from a lumpy tussock of old grass some twenty yards in front
of them, with black-tipped ears erect and long hinder limbs throwing it
forward, started a hare.  It bolted for a thicket of alders.  Sir
Geoffrey put his gun to his shoulder, but there was something in the
animal's grace of movement that strangely charmed Dorian Gray, and he
cried out at once, "Don't shoot it, Geoffrey.  Let it live."

"What nonsense, Dorian!" laughed his companion, and as the hare bounded
into the thicket, he fired.  There were two cries heard, the cry of a
hare in pain, which is dreadful, the cry of a man in agony, which is
worse.

"Good heavens!  I have hit a beater!" exclaimed Sir Geoffrey.  "What an
ass the man was to get in front of the guns!  Stop shooting there!" he
called out at the top of his voice.  "A man is hurt."

The head-keeper came running up with a stick in his hand.

"Where, sir?  Where is he?" he shouted.  At the same time, the firing
ceased along the line.

"Here," answered Sir Geoffrey angrily, hurrying towards the thicket.
"Why on earth don't you keep your men back?  Spoiled my shooting for
the day."

Dorian watched them as they plunged into the alder-clump, brushing the
lithe swinging branches aside.  In a few moments they emerged, dragging
a body after them into the sunlight.  He turned away in horror.  It
seemed to him that misfortune followed wherever he went.  He heard Sir
Geoffrey ask if the man was really dead, and the affirmative answer of
the keeper.  The wood seemed to him to have become suddenly alive with
faces.  There was the trampling of myriad feet and the low buzz of
voices.  A great copper-breasted pheasant came beating through the
boughs overhead.

After a few moments--that were to him, in his perturbed state, like
endless hours of pain--he felt a hand laid on his shoulder.  He started
and looked round.

"Dorian," said Lord Henry, "I had better tell them that the shooting is
stopped for to-day. It would not look well to go on."

"I wish it were stopped for ever, Harry," he answered bitterly.  "The
whole thing is hideous and cruel.  Is the man ...?"

He could not finish the sentence.

"I am afraid so," rejoined Lord Henry.  "He got the whole charge of
shot in his chest.  He must have died almost instantaneously.  Come;
let us go home."

They walked side by side in the direction of the avenue for nearly
fifty yards without speaking.  Then Dorian looked at Lord Henry and
said, with a heavy sigh, "It is a bad omen, Harry, a very bad omen."

"What is?" asked Lord Henry.  "Oh! this accident, I suppose.  My dear
fellow, it can't be helped.  It was the man's own fault.  Why did he
get in front of the guns?  Besides, it is nothing to us.  It is rather
awkward for Geoffrey, of course.  It does not do to pepper beaters.  It
makes people think that one is a wild shot.  And Geoffrey is not; he
shoots very straight.  But there is no use talking about the matter."

Dorian shook his head.  "It is a bad omen, Harry.  I feel as if
something horrible were going to happen to some of us.  To myself,
perhaps," he added, passing his hand over his eyes, with a gesture of
pain.

The elder man laughed.  "The only horrible thing in the world is _ennui_,
Dorian.  That is the one sin for which there is no forgiveness.  But we
are not likely to suffer from it unless these fellows keep chattering
about this thing at dinner.  I must tell them that the subject is to be
tabooed.  As for omens, there is no such thing as an omen.  Destiny
does not send us heralds.  She is too wise or too cruel for that.
Besides, what on earth could happen to you, Dorian?  You have
everything in the world that a man can want.  There is no one who would
not be delighted to change places with you."

"There is no one with whom I would not change places, Harry.  Don't
laugh like that.  I am telling you the truth.  The wretched peasant who
has just died is better off than I am.  I have no terror of death.  It
is the coming of death that terrifies me.  Its monstrous wings seem to
wheel in the leaden air around me.  Good heavens! don't you see a man
moving behind the trees there, watching me, waiting for me?"

Lord Henry looked in the direction in which the trembling gloved hand
was pointing.  "Yes," he said, smiling, "I see the gardener waiting for
you.  I suppose he wants to ask you what flowers you wish to have on
the table to-night. How absurdly nervous you are, my dear fellow!  You
must come and see my doctor, when we get back to town."

Dorian heaved a sigh of relief as he saw the gardener approaching.  The
man touched his hat, glanced for a moment at Lord Henry in a hesitating
manner, and then produced a letter, which he handed to his master.
"Her Grace told me to wait for an answer," he murmured.

Dorian put the letter into his pocket.  "Tell her Grace that I am
coming in," he said, coldly.  The man turned round and went rapidly in
the direction of the house.

"How fond women are of doing dangerous things!" laughed Lord Henry.
"It is one of the qualities in them that I admire most.  A woman will
flirt with anybody in the world as long as other people are looking on."

"How fond you are of saying dangerous things, Harry!  In the present
instance, you are quite astray.  I like the duchess very much, but I
don't love her."

"And the duchess loves you very much, but she likes you less, so you
are excellently matched."

"You are talking scandal, Harry, and there is never any basis for
scandal."

"The basis of every scandal is an immoral certainty," said Lord Henry,
lighting a cigarette.

"You would sacrifice anybody, Harry, for the sake of an epigram."

"The world goes to the altar of its own accord," was the answer.

"I wish I could love," cried Dorian Gray with a deep note of pathos in
his voice.  "But I seem to have lost the passion and forgotten the
desire.  I am too much concentrated on myself.  My own personality has
become a burden to me.  I want to escape, to go away, to forget.  It
was silly of me to come down here at all.  I think I shall send a wire
to Harvey to have the yacht got ready.  On a yacht one is safe."

"Safe from what, Dorian?  You are in some trouble.  Why not tell me
what it is?  You know I would help you."

"I can't tell you, Harry," he answered sadly.  "And I dare say it is
only a fancy of mine.  This unfortunate accident has upset me.  I have
a horrible presentiment that something of the kind may happen to me."

"What nonsense!"

"I hope it is, but I can't help feeling it.  Ah! here is the duchess,
looking like Artemis in a tailor-made gown.  You see we have come back,
Duchess."

"I have heard all about it, Mr. Gray," she answered.  "Poor Geoffrey is
terribly upset.  And it seems that you asked him not to shoot the hare.
How curious!"

"Yes, it was very curious.  I don't know what made me say it.  Some
whim, I suppose.  It looked the loveliest of little live things.  But I
am sorry they told you about the man.  It is a hideous subject."

"It is an annoying subject," broke in Lord Henry.  "It has no
psychological value at all.  Now if Geoffrey had done the thing on
purpose, how interesting he would be!  I should like to know some one
who had committed a real murder."

"How horrid of you, Harry!" cried the duchess.  "Isn't it, Mr. Gray?
Harry, Mr. Gray is ill again.  He is going to faint."

Dorian drew himself up with an effort and smiled.  "It is nothing,
Duchess," he murmured; "my nerves are dreadfully out of order.  That is
all.  I am afraid I walked too far this morning.  I didn't hear what
Harry said.  Was it very bad?  You must tell me some other time.  I
think I must go and lie down.  You will excuse me, won't you?"

They had reached the great flight of steps that led from the
conservatory on to the terrace.  As the glass door closed behind
Dorian, Lord Henry turned and looked at the duchess with his slumberous
eyes.  "Are you very much in love with him?" he asked.

She did not answer for some time, but stood gazing at the landscape.
"I wish I knew," she said at last.

He shook his head.  "Knowledge would be fatal.  It is the uncertainty
that charms one.  A mist makes things wonderful."

"One may lose one's way."

"All ways end at the same point, my dear Gladys."

"What is that?"

"Disillusion."

"It was my _debut_ in life," she sighed.

"It came to you crowned."

"I am tired of strawberry leaves."

"They become you."

"Only in public."

"You would miss them," said Lord Henry.

"I will not part with a petal."

"Monmouth has ears."

"Old age is dull of hearing."

"Has he never been jealous?"

"I wish he had been."

He glanced about as if in search of something.  "What are you looking
for?" she inquired.

"The button from your foil," he answered.  "You have dropped it."

She laughed.  "I have still the mask."

"It makes your eyes lovelier," was his reply.

She laughed again.  Her teeth showed like white seeds in a scarlet
fruit.

Upstairs, in his own room, Dorian Gray was lying on a sofa, with terror
in every tingling fibre of his body.  Life had suddenly become too
hideous a burden for him to bear.  The dreadful death of the unlucky
beater, shot in the thicket like a wild animal, had seemed to him to
pre-figure death for himself also.  He had nearly swooned at what Lord
Henry had said in a chance mood of cynical jesting.

At five o'clock he rang his bell for his servant and gave him orders to
pack his things for the night-express to town, and to have the brougham
at the door by eight-thirty. He was determined not to sleep another
night at Selby Royal.  It was an ill-omened place.  Death walked there
in the sunlight.  The grass of the forest had been spotted with blood.

Then he wrote a note to Lord Henry, telling him that he was going up to
town to consult his doctor and asking him to entertain his guests in
his absence.  As he was putting it into the envelope, a knock came to
the door, and his valet informed him that the head-keeper wished to see
him.  He frowned and bit his lip.  "Send him in," he muttered, after
some moments' hesitation.

As soon as the man entered, Dorian pulled his chequebook out of a
drawer and spread it out before him.

"I suppose you have come about the unfortunate accident of this
morning, Thornton?" he said, taking up a pen.

"Yes, sir," answered the gamekeeper.

"Was the poor fellow married?  Had he any people dependent on him?"
asked Dorian, looking bored.  "If so, I should not like them to be left
in want, and will send them any sum of money you may think necessary."

"We don't know who he is, sir.  That is what I took the liberty of
coming to you about."

"Don't know who he is?" said Dorian, listlessly.  "What do you mean?
Wasn't he one of your men?"

"No, sir.  Never saw him before.  Seems like a sailor, sir."

The pen dropped from Dorian Gray's hand, and he felt as if his heart
had suddenly stopped beating.  "A sailor?" he cried out.  "Did you say
a sailor?"

"Yes, sir.  He looks as if he had been a sort of sailor; tattooed on
both arms, and that kind of thing."

"Was there anything found on him?" said Dorian, leaning forward and
looking at the man with startled eyes.  "Anything that would tell his
name?"

"Some money, sir--not much, and a six-shooter. There was no name of any
kind.  A decent-looking man, sir, but rough-like. A sort of sailor we
think."

Dorian started to his feet.  A terrible hope fluttered past him.  He
clutched at it madly.  "Where is the body?" he exclaimed.  "Quick!  I
must see it at once."

"It is in an empty stable in the Home Farm, sir.  The folk don't like
to have that sort of thing in their houses.  They say a corpse brings
bad luck."

"The Home Farm!  Go there at once and meet me.  Tell one of the grooms
to bring my horse round.  No. Never mind.  I'll go to the stables
myself.  It will save time."

In less than a quarter of an hour, Dorian Gray was galloping down the
long avenue as hard as he could go.  The trees seemed to sweep past him
in spectral procession, and wild shadows to fling themselves across his
path.  Once the mare swerved at a white gate-post and nearly threw him.
He lashed her across the neck with his crop.  She cleft the dusky air
like an arrow.  The stones flew from her hoofs.

At last he reached the Home Farm.  Two men were loitering in the yard.
He leaped from the saddle and threw the reins to one of them.  In the
farthest stable a light was glimmering.  Something seemed to tell him
that the body was there, and he hurried to the door and put his hand
upon the latch.

There he paused for a moment, feeling that he was on the brink of a
discovery that would either make or mar his life.  Then he thrust the
door open and entered.

On a heap of sacking in the far corner was lying the dead body of a man
dressed in a coarse shirt and a pair of blue trousers.  A spotted
handkerchief had been placed over the face.  A coarse candle, stuck in
a bottle, sputtered beside it.

Dorian Gray shuddered.  He felt that his could not be the hand to take
the handkerchief away, and called out to one of the farm-servants to
come to him.

"Take that thing off the face.  I wish to see it," he said, clutching
at the door-post for support.

When the farm-servant had done so, he stepped forward.  A cry of joy
broke from his lips.  The man who had been shot in the thicket was
James Vane.

He stood there for some minutes looking at the dead body.  As he rode
home, his eyes were full of tears, for he knew he was safe.





"There is no use your telling me that you are going to be good," cried
Lord Henry, dipping his white fingers into a red copper bowl filled
with rose-water. "You are quite perfect.  Pray, don't change."

Dorian Gray shook his head.  "No, Harry, I have done too many dreadful
things in my life.  I am not going to do any more.  I began my good
actions yesterday."

"Where were you yesterday?"

"In the country, Harry.  I was staying at a little inn by myself."

"My dear boy," said Lord Henry, smiling, "anybody can be good in the
country.  There are no temptations there.  That is the reason why
people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.
Civilization is not by any means an easy thing to attain to.  There are
only two ways by which man can reach it.  One is by being cultured, the
other by being corrupt.  Country people have no opportunity of being
either, so they stagnate."

"Culture and corruption," echoed Dorian.  "I have known something of
both.  It seems terrible to me now that they should ever be found
together.  For I have a new ideal, Harry.  I am going to alter.  I
think I have altered."

"You have not yet told me what your good action was.  Or did you say
you had done more than one?" asked his companion as he spilled into his
plate a little crimson pyramid of seeded strawberries and, through a
perforated, shell-shaped spoon, snowed white sugar upon them.

"I can tell you, Harry.  It is not a story I could tell to any one
else.  I spared somebody.  It sounds vain, but you understand what I
mean.  She was quite beautiful and wonderfully like Sibyl Vane.  I
think it was that which first attracted me to her.  You remember Sibyl,
don't you?  How long ago that seems!  Well, Hetty was not one of our
own class, of course.  She was simply a girl in a village.  But I
really loved her.  I am quite sure that I loved her.  All during this
wonderful May that we have been having, I used to run down and see her
two or three times a week.  Yesterday she met me in a little orchard.
The apple-blossoms kept tumbling down on her hair, and she was
laughing.  We were to have gone away together this morning at dawn.
Suddenly I determined to leave her as flowerlike as I had found her."

"I should think the novelty of the emotion must have given you a thrill
of real pleasure, Dorian," interrupted Lord Henry.  "But I can finish
your idyll for you.  You gave her good advice and broke her heart.
That was the beginning of your reformation."

"Harry, you are horrible!  You mustn't say these dreadful things.
Hetty's heart is not broken.  Of course, she cried and all that.  But
there is no disgrace upon her.  She can live, like Perdita, in her
garden of mint and marigold."

"And weep over a faithless Florizel," said Lord Henry, laughing, as he
leaned back in his chair.  "My dear Dorian, you have the most curiously
boyish moods.  Do you think this girl will ever be really content now
with any one of her own rank?  I suppose she will be married some day
to a rough carter or a grinning ploughman.  Well, the fact of having
met you, and loved you, will teach her to despise her husband, and she
will be wretched.  From a moral point of view, I cannot say that I
think much of your great renunciation.  Even as a beginning, it is
poor.  Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the
present moment in some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies
round her, like Ophelia?"

"I can't bear this, Harry!  You mock at everything, and then suggest
the most serious tragedies.  I am sorry I told you now.  I don't care
what you say to me.  I know I was right in acting as I did.  Poor
Hetty!  As I rode past the farm this morning, I saw her white face at
the window, like a spray of jasmine.  Don't let us talk about it any
more, and don't try to persuade me that the first good action I have
done for years, the first little bit of self-sacrifice I have ever
known, is really a sort of sin.  I want to be better.  I am going to be
better.  Tell me something about yourself.  What is going on in town?
I have not been to the club for days."

"The people are still discussing poor Basil's disappearance."

"I should have thought they had got tired of that by this time," said
Dorian, pouring himself out some wine and frowning slightly.

"My dear boy, they have only been talking about it for six weeks, and
the British public are really not equal to the mental strain of having
more than one topic every three months.  They have been very fortunate
lately, however.  They have had my own divorce-case and Alan Campbell's
suicide.  Now they have got the mysterious disappearance of an artist.
Scotland Yard still insists that the man in the grey ulster who left
for Paris by the midnight train on the ninth of November was poor
Basil, and the French police declare that Basil never arrived in Paris
at all.  I suppose in about a fortnight we shall be told that he has
been seen in San Francisco.  It is an odd thing, but every one who
disappears is said to be seen at San Francisco.  It must be a
delightful city, and possess all the attractions of the next world."

"What do you think has happened to Basil?" asked Dorian, holding up his
Burgundy against the light and wondering how it was that he could
discuss the matter so calmly.

"I have not the slightest idea.  If Basil chooses to hide himself, it
is no business of mine.  If he is dead, I don't want to think about
him.  Death is the only thing that ever terrifies me.  I hate it."

"Why?" said the younger man wearily.

"Because," said Lord Henry, passing beneath his nostrils the gilt
trellis of an open vinaigrette box, "one can survive everything
nowadays except that.  Death and vulgarity are the only two facts in
the nineteenth century that one cannot explain away.  Let us have our
coffee in the music-room, Dorian.  You must play Chopin to me.  The man
with whom my wife ran away played Chopin exquisitely.  Poor Victoria!
I was very fond of her.  The house is rather lonely without her.  Of
course, married life is merely a habit, a bad habit.  But then one
regrets the loss even of one's worst habits.  Perhaps one regrets them
the most.  They are such an essential part of one's personality."

Dorian said nothing, but rose from the table, and passing into the next
room, sat down to the piano and let his fingers stray across the white
and black ivory of the keys.  After the coffee had been brought in, he
stopped, and looking over at Lord Henry, said, "Harry, did it ever
occur to you that Basil was murdered?"

Lord Henry yawned.  "Basil was very popular, and always wore a
Waterbury watch.  Why should he have been murdered?  He was not clever
enough to have enemies.  Of course, he had a wonderful genius for
painting.  But a man can paint like Velasquez and yet be as dull as
possible.  Basil was really rather dull.  He only interested me once,
and that was when he told me, years ago, that he had a wild adoration
for you and that you were the dominant motive of his art."

"I was very fond of Basil," said Dorian with a note of sadness in his
voice.  "But don't people say that he was murdered?"

"Oh, some of the papers do.  It does not seem to me to be at all
probable.  I know there are dreadful places in Paris, but Basil was not
the sort of man to have gone to them.  He had no curiosity.  It was his
chief defect."

"What would you say, Harry, if I told you that I had murdered Basil?"
said the younger man.  He watched him intently after he had spoken.

"I would say, my dear fellow, that you were posing for a character that
doesn't suit you.  All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime.
It is not in you, Dorian, to commit a murder.  I am sorry if I hurt
your vanity by saying so, but I assure you it is true.  Crime belongs
exclusively to the lower orders.  I don't blame them in the smallest
degree.  I should fancy that crime was to them what art is to us,
simply a method of procuring extraordinary sensations."

"A method of procuring sensations?  Do you think, then, that a man who
has once committed a murder could possibly do the same crime again?
Don't tell me that."

"Oh! anything becomes a pleasure if one does it too often," cried Lord
Henry, laughing.  "That is one of the most important secrets of life.
I should fancy, however, that murder is always a mistake.  One should
never do anything that one cannot talk about after dinner.  But let us
pass from poor Basil.  I wish I could believe that he had come to such
a really romantic end as you suggest, but I can't. I dare say he fell
into the Seine off an omnibus and that the conductor hushed up the
scandal.  Yes:  I should fancy that was his end.  I see him lying now
on his back under those dull-green waters, with the heavy barges
floating over him and long weeds catching in his hair.  Do you know, I
don't think he would have done much more good work.  During the last
ten years his painting had gone off very much."

Dorian heaved a sigh, and Lord Henry strolled across the room and began
to stroke the head of a curious Java parrot, a large, grey-plumaged
bird with pink crest and tail, that was balancing itself upon a bamboo
perch.  As his pointed fingers touched it, it dropped the white scurf
of crinkled lids over black, glasslike eyes and began to sway backwards
and forwards.

"Yes," he continued, turning round and taking his handkerchief out of
his pocket; "his painting had quite gone off.  It seemed to me to have
lost something.  It had lost an ideal.  When you and he ceased to be
great friends, he ceased to be a great artist.  What was it separated
you?  I suppose he bored you.  If so, he never forgave you.  It's a
habit bores have.  By the way, what has become of that wonderful
portrait he did of you?  I don't think I have ever seen it since he
finished it.  Oh!  I remember your telling me years ago that you had
sent it down to Selby, and that it had got mislaid or stolen on the
way.  You never got it back?  What a pity! it was really a
masterpiece.  I remember I wanted to buy it.  I wish I had now.  It
belonged to Basil's best period.  Since then, his work was that curious
mixture of bad painting and good intentions that always entitles a man
to be called a representative British artist.  Did you advertise for
it?  You should."

"I forget," said Dorian.  "I suppose I did.  But I never really liked
it.  I am sorry I sat for it.  The memory of the thing is hateful to
me.  Why do you talk of it?  It used to remind me of those curious
lines in some play--Hamlet, I think--how do they run?--

    "Like the painting of a sorrow,
     A face without a heart."

Yes:  that is what it was like."

Lord Henry laughed.  "If a man treats life artistically, his brain is
his heart," he answered, sinking into an arm-chair.

Dorian Gray shook his head and struck some soft chords on the piano.
"'Like the painting of a sorrow,'" he repeated, "'a face without a
heart.'"

The elder man lay back and looked at him with half-closed eyes.  "By
the way, Dorian," he said after a pause, "'what does it profit a man if
he gain the whole world and lose--how does the quotation run?--his own
soul'?"

The music jarred, and Dorian Gray started and stared at his friend.
"Why do you ask me that, Harry?"

"My dear fellow," said Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows in surprise,
"I asked you because I thought you might be able to give me an answer.
That is all.  I was going through the park last Sunday, and close by
the Marble Arch there stood a little crowd of shabby-looking people
listening to some vulgar street-preacher. As I passed by, I heard the
man yelling out that question to his audience.  It struck me as being
rather dramatic.  London is very rich in curious effects of that kind.
A wet Sunday, an uncouth Christian in a mackintosh, a ring of sickly
white faces under a broken roof of dripping umbrellas, and a wonderful
phrase flung into the air by shrill hysterical lips--it was really very
good in its way, quite a suggestion.  I thought of telling the prophet
that art had a soul, but that man had not.  I am afraid, however, he
would not have understood me."

"Don't, Harry.  The soul is a terrible reality.  It can be bought, and
sold, and bartered away.  It can be poisoned, or made perfect.  There
is a soul in each one of us.  I know it."

"Do you feel quite sure of that, Dorian?"

"Quite sure."

"Ah! then it must be an illusion.  The things one feels absolutely
certain about are never true.  That is the fatality of faith, and the
lesson of romance.  How grave you are!  Don't be so serious.  What have
you or I to do with the superstitions of our age?  No:  we have given
up our belief in the soul.  Play me something.  Play me a nocturne,
Dorian, and, as you play, tell me, in a low voice, how you have kept
your youth.  You must have some secret.  I am only ten years older than
you are, and I am wrinkled, and worn, and yellow.  You are really
wonderful, Dorian.  You have never looked more charming than you do
to-night. You remind me of the day I saw you first.  You were rather
cheeky, very shy, and absolutely extraordinary.  You have changed, of
course, but not in appearance.  I wish you would tell me your secret.
To get back my youth I would do anything in the world, except take
exercise, get up early, or be respectable.  Youth!  There is nothing
like it.  It's absurd to talk of the ignorance of youth.  The only
people to whose opinions I listen now with any respect are people much
younger than myself.  They seem in front of me.  Life has revealed to
them her latest wonder.  As for the aged, I always contradict the aged.
I do it on principle.  If you ask them their opinion on something that
happened yesterday, they solemnly give you the opinions current in
1820, when people wore high stocks, believed in everything, and knew
absolutely nothing.  How lovely that thing you are playing is!  I
wonder, did Chopin write it at Majorca, with the sea weeping round the
villa and the salt spray dashing against the panes?  It is marvellously
romantic.  What a blessing it is that there is one art left to us that
is not imitative!  Don't stop.  I want music to-night. It seems to me
that you are the young Apollo and that I am Marsyas listening to you.
I have sorrows, Dorian, of my own, that even you know nothing of.  The
tragedy of old age is not that one is old, but that one is young.  I am
amazed sometimes at my own sincerity.  Ah, Dorian, how happy you are!
What an exquisite life you have had!  You have drunk deeply of
everything.  You have crushed the grapes against your palate.  Nothing
has been hidden from you.  And it has all been to you no more than the
sound of music.  It has not marred you.  You are still the same."

"I am not the same, Harry."

"Yes, you are the same.  I wonder what the rest of your life will be.
Don't spoil it by renunciations.  At present you are a perfect type.
Don't make yourself incomplete.  You are quite flawless now.  You need
not shake your head:  you know you are.  Besides, Dorian, don't deceive
yourself.  Life is not governed by will or intention.  Life is a
question of nerves, and fibres, and slowly built-up cells in which
thought hides itself and passion has its dreams.  You may fancy
yourself safe and think yourself strong.  But a chance tone of colour
in a room or a morning sky, a particular perfume that you had once
loved and that brings subtle memories with it, a line from a forgotten
poem that you had come across again, a cadence from a piece of music
that you had ceased to play--I tell you, Dorian, that it is on things
like these that our lives depend.  Browning writes about that
somewhere; but our own senses will imagine them for us.  There are
moments when the odour of _lilas blanc_ passes suddenly across me, and I
have to live the strangest month of my life over again.  I wish I could
change places with you, Dorian.  The world has cried out against us
both, but it has always worshipped you.  It always will worship you.
You are the type of what the age is searching for, and what it is
afraid it has found.  I am so glad that you have never done anything,
never carved a statue, or painted a picture, or produced anything
outside of yourself!  Life has been your art.  You have set yourself to
music.  Your days are your sonnets."

Dorian rose up from the piano and passed his hand through his hair.
"Yes, life has been exquisite," he murmured, "but I am not going to
have the same life, Harry.  And you must not say these extravagant
things to me.  You don't know everything about me.  I think that if you
did, even you would turn from me.  You laugh.  Don't laugh."

"Why have you stopped playing, Dorian?  Go back and give me the
nocturne over again.  Look at that great, honey-coloured moon that
hangs in the dusky air.  She is waiting for you to charm her, and if
you play she will come closer to the earth.  You won't?  Let us go to
the club, then.  It has been a charming evening, and we must end it
charmingly.  There is some one at White's who wants immensely to know
you--young Lord Poole, Bournemouth's eldest son.  He has already copied
your neckties, and has begged me to introduce him to you.  He is quite
delightful and rather reminds me of you."

"I hope not," said Dorian with a sad look in his eyes.  "But I am tired
to-night, Harry.  I shan't go to the club.  It is nearly eleven, and I
want to go to bed early."

"Do stay.  You have never played so well as to-night. There was
something in your touch that was wonderful.  It had more expression
than I had ever heard from it before."

"It is because I am going to be good," he answered, smiling.  "I am a
little changed already."

"You cannot change to me, Dorian," said Lord Henry.  "You and I will
always be friends."

"Yet you poisoned me with a book once.  I should not forgive that.
Harry, promise me that you will never lend that book to any one.  It
does harm."

"My dear boy, you are really beginning to moralize.  You will soon be
going about like the converted, and the revivalist, warning people
against all the sins of which you have grown tired.  You are much too
delightful to do that.  Besides, it is no use.  You and I are what we
are, and will be what we will be.  As for being poisoned by a book,
there is no such thing as that.  Art has no influence upon action.  It
annihilates the desire to act.  It is superbly sterile.  The books that
the world calls immoral are books that show the world its own shame.
That is all.  But we won't discuss literature.  Come round to-morrow. I
am going to ride at eleven.  We might go together, and I will take you
to lunch afterwards with Lady Branksome.  She is a charming woman, and
wants to consult you about some tapestries she is thinking of buying.
Mind you come.  Or shall we lunch with our little duchess?  She says
she never sees you now.  Perhaps you are tired of Gladys?  I thought
you would be.  Her clever tongue gets on one's nerves.  Well, in any
case, be here at eleven."

"Must I really come, Harry?"

"Certainly.  The park is quite lovely now.  I don't think there have
been such lilacs since the year I met you."

"Very well.  I shall be here at eleven," said Dorian.  "Good night,
Harry."  As he reached the door, he hesitated for a moment, as if he
had something more to say.  Then he sighed and went out.





It was a lovely night, so warm that he threw his coat over his arm and
did not even put his silk scarf round his throat.  As he strolled home,
smoking his cigarette, two young men in evening dress passed him.  He
heard one of them whisper to the other, "That is Dorian Gray." He
remembered how pleased he used to be when he was pointed out, or stared
at, or talked about.  He was tired of hearing his own name now.  Half
the charm of the little village where he had been so often lately was
that no one knew who he was.  He had often told the girl whom he had
lured to love him that he was poor, and she had believed him.  He had
told her once that he was wicked, and she had laughed at him and
answered that wicked people were always very old and very ugly.  What a
laugh she had!--just like a thrush singing.  And how pretty she had
been in her cotton dresses and her large hats!  She knew nothing, but
she had everything that he had lost.

When he reached home, he found his servant waiting up for him.  He sent
him to bed, and threw himself down on the sofa in the library, and
began to think over some of the things that Lord Henry had said to him.

Was it really true that one could never change?  He felt a wild longing
for the unstained purity of his boyhood--his rose-white boyhood, as
Lord Henry had once called it.  He knew that he had tarnished himself,
filled his mind with corruption and given horror to his fancy; that he
had been an evil influence to others, and had experienced a terrible
joy in being so; and that of the lives that had crossed his own, it had
been the fairest and the most full of promise that he had brought to
shame.  But was it all irretrievable?  Was there no hope for him?

Ah! in what a monstrous moment of pride and passion he had prayed that
the portrait should bear the burden of his days, and he keep the
unsullied splendour of eternal youth!  All his failure had been due to
that.  Better for him that each sin of his life had brought its sure
swift penalty along with it.  There was purification in punishment.
Not "Forgive us our sins" but "Smite us for our iniquities" should be
the prayer of man to a most just God.

The curiously carved mirror that Lord Henry had given to him, so many
years ago now, was standing on the table, and the white-limbed Cupids
laughed round it as of old.  He took it up, as he had done on that
night of horror when he had first noted the change in the fatal
picture, and with wild, tear-dimmed eyes looked into its polished
shield.  Once, some one who had terribly loved him had written to him a
mad letter, ending with these idolatrous words: "The world is changed
because you are made of ivory and gold.  The curves of your lips
rewrite history."  The phrases came back to his memory, and he repeated
them over and over to himself.  Then he loathed his own beauty, and
flinging the mirror on the floor, crushed it into silver splinters
beneath his heel.  It was his beauty that had ruined him, his beauty
and the youth that he had prayed for.  But for those two things, his
life might have been free from stain.  His beauty had been to him but a
mask, his youth but a mockery.  What was youth at best?  A green, an
unripe time, a time of shallow moods, and sickly thoughts.  Why had he
worn its livery?  Youth had spoiled him.

It was better not to think of the past.  Nothing could alter that.  It
was of himself, and of his own future, that he had to think.  James
Vane was hidden in a nameless grave in Selby churchyard.  Alan Campbell
had shot himself one night in his laboratory, but had not revealed the
secret that he had been forced to know.  The excitement, such as it
was, over Basil Hallward's disappearance would soon pass away.  It was
already waning.  He was perfectly safe there.  Nor, indeed, was it the
death of Basil Hallward that weighed most upon his mind.  It was the
living death of his own soul that troubled him.  Basil had painted the
portrait that had marred his life.  He could not forgive him that.  It
was the portrait that had done everything.  Basil had said things to
him that were unbearable, and that he had yet borne with patience.  The
murder had been simply the madness of a moment.  As for Alan Campbell,
his suicide had been his own act.  He had chosen to do it.  It was
nothing to him.

A new life!  That was what he wanted.  That was what he was waiting
for.  Surely he had begun it already.  He had spared one innocent
thing, at any rate.  He would never again tempt innocence.  He would be
good.

As he thought of Hetty Merton, he began to wonder if the portrait in
the locked room had changed.  Surely it was not still so horrible as it
had been?  Perhaps if his life became pure, he would be able to expel
every sign of evil passion from the face.  Perhaps the signs of evil
had already gone away.  He would go and look.

He took the lamp from the table and crept upstairs.  As he unbarred the
door, a smile of joy flitted across his strangely young-looking face
and lingered for a moment about his lips.  Yes, he would be good, and
the hideous thing that he had hidden away would no longer be a terror
to him.  He felt as if the load had been lifted from him already.

He went in quietly, locking the door behind him, as was his custom, and
dragged the purple hanging from the portrait.  A cry of pain and
indignation broke from him.  He could see no change, save that in the
eyes there was a look of cunning and in the mouth the curved wrinkle of
the hypocrite.  The thing was still loathsome--more loathsome, if
possible, than before--and the scarlet dew that spotted the hand seemed
brighter, and more like blood newly spilled.  Then he trembled.  Had it
been merely vanity that had made him do his one good deed?  Or the
desire for a new sensation, as Lord Henry had hinted, with his mocking
laugh?  Or that passion to act a part that sometimes makes us do things
finer than we are ourselves?  Or, perhaps, all these?  And why was the
red stain larger than it had been?  It seemed to have crept like a
horrible disease over the wrinkled fingers.  There was blood on the
painted feet, as though the thing had dripped--blood even on the hand
that had not held the knife.  Confess?  Did it mean that he was to
confess?  To give himself up and be put to death?  He laughed.  He felt
that the idea was monstrous.  Besides, even if he did confess, who
would believe him?  There was no trace of the murdered man anywhere.
Everything belonging to him had been destroyed.  He himself had burned
what had been below-stairs. The world would simply say that he was mad.
They would shut him up if he persisted in his story.... Yet it was
his duty to confess, to suffer public shame, and to make public
atonement.  There was a God who called upon men to tell their sins to
earth as well as to heaven.  Nothing that he could do would cleanse him
till he had told his own sin.  His sin?  He shrugged his shoulders.
The death of Basil Hallward seemed very little to him.  He was thinking
of Hetty Merton.  For it was an unjust mirror, this mirror of his soul
that he was looking at.  Vanity?  Curiosity?  Hypocrisy?  Had there
been nothing more in his renunciation than that?  There had been
something more.  At least he thought so.  But who could tell? ... No.
There had been nothing more.  Through vanity he had spared her.  In
hypocrisy he had worn the mask of goodness.  For curiosity's sake he
had tried the denial of self.  He recognized that now.

But this murder--was it to dog him all his life?  Was he always to be
burdened by his past?  Was he really to confess?  Never.  There was
only one bit of evidence left against him.  The picture itself--that
was evidence.  He would destroy it.  Why had he kept it so long?  Once
it had given him pleasure to watch it changing and growing old.  Of
late he had felt no such pleasure.  It had kept him awake at night.
When he had been away, he had been filled with terror lest other eyes
should look upon it.  It had brought melancholy across his passions.
Its mere memory had marred many moments of joy.  It had been like
conscience to him.  Yes, it had been conscience.  He would destroy it.

He looked round and saw the knife that had stabbed Basil Hallward.  He
had cleaned it many times, till there was no stain left upon it.  It
was bright, and glistened.  As it had killed the painter, so it would
kill the painter's work, and all that that meant.  It would kill the
past, and when that was dead, he would be free.  It would kill this
monstrous soul-life, and without its hideous warnings, he would be at
peace.  He seized the thing, and stabbed the picture with it.

There was a cry heard, and a crash.  The cry was so horrible in its
agony that the frightened servants woke and crept out of their rooms.
Two gentlemen, who were passing in the square below, stopped and looked
up at the great house.  They walked on till they met a policeman and
brought him back.  The man rang the bell several times, but there was
no answer.  Except for a light in one of the top windows, the house was
all dark.  After a time, he went away and stood in an adjoining portico
and watched.

"Whose house is that, Constable?" asked the elder of the two gentlemen.

"Mr. Dorian Gray's, sir," answered the policeman.

They looked at each other, as they walked away, and sneered.  One of
them was Sir Henry Ashton's uncle.

Inside, in the servants' part of the house, the half-clad domestics
were talking in low whispers to each other.  Old Mrs. Leaf was crying
and wringing her hands.  Francis was as pale as death.

After about a quarter of an hour, he got the coachman and one of the
footmen and crept upstairs.  They knocked, but there was no reply.
They called out.  Everything was still.  Finally, after vainly trying
to force the door, they got on the roof and dropped down on to the
balcony.  The windows yielded easily--their bolts were old.

When they entered, they found hanging upon the wall a splendid portrait
of their master as they had last seen him, in all the wonder of his
exquisite youth and beauty.  Lying on the floor was a dead man, in
evening dress, with a knife in his heart.  He was withered, wrinkled,
and loathsome of visage.  It was not till they had examined the rings
that they recognized who it was.

                                  SCENE

_The Market Place of Padua at noon_; _in the background is the great
Cathedral of Padua_; _the architecture is Romanesque_, _and wrought in
black and white marbles_; _a flight of marble steps leads up to the
Cathedral door_; _at the foot of the steps are two large stone lions_;
_the houses on each aide of the stage have coloured awnings from their
windows_, _and are flanked by stone arcades_; _on the right of the stage
is the public fountain_, _with a triton in green bronze blowing from a
conch_; _around the fountain is a stone seat_; _the bell of the Cathedral
is ringing_, _and the citizens_, _men_, _women and children_, _are
passing into the Cathedral_.

[_Enter_ GUIDO FERRANTI _and_ ASCANIO CRISTOFANO.]

   Now by my life, Guido, I will go no farther; for if I walk another
   step I will have no life left to swear by; this wild-goose errand of
   yours!

                                [_Sits down on the step of the fountain_.]

GUIDO

   I think it must be here.  [_Goes up to passer-by and doffs his cap_.]
   Pray, sir, is this the market place, and that the church of Santa
   Croce?  [_Citizen bows_.]  I thank you, sir.

ASCANIO

   Well?

GUIDO

   Ay! it is here.

ASCANIO

   I would it were somewhere else, for I see no wine-shop.

GUIDO

   [_Taking a letter from his pocket and reading it_.]  ‘The hour noon;
   the city, Padua; the place, the market; and the day, Saint Philip’s
   Day.’

ASCANIO

   And what of the man, how shall we know him?

GUIDO [_reading still_]

   ‘I will wear a violet cloak with a silver falcon broidered on the
   shoulder.’  A brave attire, Ascanio.

ASCANIO

   I’d sooner have my leathern jerkin.  And you think he will tell you of
   your father?

GUIDO

   Why, yes!  It is a month ago now, you remember; I was in the vineyard,
   just at the corner nearest the road, where the goats used to get in, a
   man rode up and asked me was my name Guido, and gave me this letter,
   signed ‘Your Father’s Friend,’ bidding me be here to-day if I would
   know the secret of my birth, and telling me how to recognise the
   writer!  I had always thought old Pedro was my uncle, but he told me
   that he was not, but that I had been left a child in his charge by
   some one he had never since seen.

ASCANIO

   And you don’t know who your father is?

GUIDO

   No.

ASCANIO

   No recollection of him even?

GUIDO

   None, Ascanio, none.

ASCANIO [_laughing_]

   Then he could never have boxed your ears so often as my father did
   mine.

GUIDO [_smiling_]

   I am sure you never deserved it.

ASCANIO

   Never; and that made it worse.  I hadn’t the consciousness of guilt to
   buoy me up.  What hour did you say he fixed?

GUIDO

   Noon.

                                       [_Clock in the Cathedral strikes_.]

ASCANIO

   It is that now, and your man has not come.  I don’t believe in him,
   Guido.  I think it is some wench who has set her eye at you; and, as I
   have followed you from Perugia to Padua, I swear you shall follow me
   to the nearest tavern.  [_Rises_.]  By the great gods of eating,
   Guido, I am as hungry as a widow is for a husband, as tired as a young
   maid is of good advice, and as dry as a monk’s sermon.  Come, Guido,
   you stand there looking at nothing, like the fool who tried to look
   into his own mind; your man will not come.

GUIDO

   Well, I suppose you are right.  Ah!  [_Just as he is leaving the stage
   with_ ASCANIO, _enter_ LORD MORANZONE _in a violet cloak_, _with a
   silver falcon broidered on the shoulder_; _he passes across to the
   Cathedral_, _and just as he is going in_ GUIDO _runs up and touches
   him_.]

MORANZONE

   Guido Ferranti, thou hast come in time.

GUIDO

   What!  Does my father live?

MORANZONE

   Ay! lives in thee.
   Thou art the same in mould and lineament,
   Carriage and form, and outward semblances;
   I trust thou art in noble mind the same.

GUIDO

   Oh, tell me of my father; I have lived
   But for this moment.

MORANZONE

   We must be alone.

GUIDO

   This is my dearest friend, who out of love
   Has followed me to Padua; as two brothers,
   There is no secret which we do not share.

MORANZONE

   There is one secret which ye shall not share;
   Bid him go hence.

GUIDO [_to_ ASCANIO]

   Come back within the hour.
   He does not know that nothing in this world
   Can dim the perfect mirror of our love.
   Within the hour come.

ASCANIO

   Speak not to him,
   There is a dreadful terror in his look.

GUIDO [_laughing_]

   Nay, nay, I doubt not that he has come to tell
   That I am some great Lord of Italy,
   And we will have long days of joy together.
   Within the hour, dear Ascanio.

                                                         [_Exit_ ASCANIO.]

   Now tell me of my father?  [_Sits down on a stone seat_.]
   Stood he tall?
   I warrant he looked tall upon his horse.
   His hair was black? or perhaps a reddish gold,
   Like a red fire of gold?  Was his voice low?
   The very bravest men have voices sometimes
   Full of low music; or a clarion was it
   That brake with terror all his enemies?
   Did he ride singly? or with many squires
   And valiant gentlemen to serve his state?
   For oftentimes methinks I feel my veins
   Beat with the blood of kings.  Was he a king?

MORANZONE

   Ay, of all men he was the kingliest.

GUIDO [_proudly_]

   Then when you saw my noble father last
   He was set high above the heads of men?

MORANZONE

   Ay, he was high above the heads of men,

[_Walks over to_ GUIDO _and puts his hand upon his shoulder_.]

   On a red scaffold, with a butcher’s block
   Set for his neck.

GUIDO [_leaping up_]

   What dreadful man art thou,
   That like a raven, or the midnight owl,
   Com’st with this awful message from the grave?

MORANZONE

   I am known here as the Count Moranzone,
   Lord of a barren castle on a rock,
   With a few acres of unkindly land
   And six not thrifty servants.  But I was one
   Of Parma’s noblest princes; more than that,
   I was your father’s friend.

GUIDO [_clasping his hand_]

   Tell me of him.

MORANZONE

   You are the son of that great Duke Lorenzo,
   He was the Prince of Parma, and the Duke
   Of all the fair domains of Lombardy
   Down to the gates of Florence; nay, Florence even
   Was wont to pay him tribute—

GUIDO

   Come to his death.

MORANZONE

   You will hear that soon enough.  Being at war—
   O noble lion of war, that would not suffer
   Injustice done in Italy!—he led
   The very flower of chivalry against
   That foul adulterous Lord of Rimini,
   Giovanni Malatesta—whom God curse!
   And was by him in treacherous ambush taken,
   And like a villain, or a low-born knave,
   Was by him on the public scaffold murdered.

GUIDO [_clutching his dagger_]

   Doth Malatesta live?

MORANZONE

   No, he is dead.

GUIDO

   Did you say dead?  O too swift runner, Death,
   Couldst thou not wait for me a little space,
   And I had done thy bidding!

MORANZONE [_clutching his wrist_]

   Thou canst do it!
   The man who sold thy father is alive.

GUIDO

   Sold! was my father sold?

MORANZONE

   Ay! trafficked for,
   Like a vile chattel, for a price betrayed,
   Bartered and bargained for in privy market
   By one whom he had held his perfect friend,
   One he had trusted, one he had well loved,
   One whom by ties of kindness he had bound—

GUIDO

   And he lives
   Who sold my father?

MORANZONE

   I will bring you to him.

GUIDO

   So, Judas, thou art living! well, I will make
   This world thy field of blood, so buy it straight-way,
   For thou must hang there.

MORANZONE

   Judas said you, boy?
   Yes, Judas in his treachery, but still
   He was more wise than Judas was, and held
   Those thirty silver pieces not enough.

GUIDO

   What got he for my father’s blood?

MORANZONE

   What got he?
   Why cities, fiefs, and principalities,
   Vineyards, and lands.

GUIDO

   Of which he shall but keep
   Six feet of ground to rot in.  Where is he,
   This damned villain, this foul devil? where?
   Show me the man, and come he cased in steel,
   In complete panoply and pride of war,
   Ay, guarded by a thousand men-at-arms,
   Yet I shall reach him through their spears, and feel
   The last black drop of blood from his black heart
   Crawl down my blade.  Show me the man, I say,
   And I will kill him.

MORANZONE [_coldly_]

   Fool, what revenge is there?
   Death is the common heritage of all,
   And death comes best when it comes suddenly.

                                               [_Goes up close to_ GUIDO.]

   Your father was betrayed, there is your cue;
   For you shall sell the seller in his turn.
   I will make you of his household, you shall sit
   At the same board with him, eat of his bread—

GUIDO

   O bitter bread!

MORANZONE

   Thy palate is too nice,
   Revenge will make it sweet.  Thou shalt o’ nights
   Pledge him in wine, drink from his cup, and be
   His intimate, so he will fawn on thee,
   Love thee, and trust thee in all secret things.
   If he bid thee be merry thou must laugh,
   And if it be his humour to be sad
   Thou shalt don sables.  Then when the time is ripe—

                                             [GUIDO _clutches his sword_.]

   Nay, nay, I trust thee not; your hot young blood,
   Undisciplined nature, and too violent rage
   Will never tarry for this great revenge,
   But wreck itself on passion.

GUIDO

   Thou knowest me not.
   Tell me the man, and I in everything
   Will do thy bidding.

MORANZONE

   Well, when the time is ripe,
   The victim trusting and the occasion sure,
   I will by sudden secret messenger
   Send thee a sign.

GUIDO

   How shall I kill him, tell me?

MORANZONE

   That night thou shalt creep into his private chamber;
   But if he sleep see that thou wake him first,
   And hold thy hand upon his throat, ay! that way,
   Then having told him of what blood thou art,
   Sprung from what father, and for what revenge,
   Bid him to pray for mercy; when he prays,
   Bid him to set a price upon his life,
   And when he strips himself of all his gold
   Tell him thou needest not gold, and hast not mercy,
   And do thy business straight away.  Swear to me
   Thou wilt not kill him till I bid thee do it,
   Or else I go to mine own house, and leave
   Thee ignorant, and thy father unavenged.

GUIDO

   Now by my father’s sword—

MORANZONE

   The common hangman
   Brake that in sunder in the public square.

GUIDO

   Then by my father’s grave—

MORANZONE

   What grave? what grave?
   Your noble father lieth in no grave,
   I saw his dust strewn on the air, his ashes
   Whirled through the windy streets like common straws
   To plague a beggar’s eyesight, and his head,
   That gentle head, set on the prison spike,
   For the vile rabble in their insolence
   To shoot their tongues at.

GUIDO

   Was it so indeed?
   Then by my father’s spotless memory,
   And by the shameful manner of his death,
   And by the base betrayal by his friend,
   For these at least remain, by these I swear
   I will not lay my hand upon his life
   Until you bid me, then—God help his soul,
   For he shall die as never dog died yet.
   And now, the sign, what is it?

MORANZONE

   This dagger, boy;
   It was your father’s.

GUIDO

   Oh, let me look at it!
   I do remember now my reputed uncle,
   That good old husbandman I left at home,
   Told me a cloak wrapped round me when a babe
   Bare too such yellow leopards wrought in gold;
   I like them best in steel, as they are here,
   They suit my purpose better.  Tell me, sir,
   Have you no message from my father to me?

MORANZONE

   Poor boy, you never saw that noble father,
   For when by his false friend he had been sold,
   Alone of all his gentlemen I escaped
   To bear the news to Parma to the Duchess.

GUIDO

   Speak to me of my mother.

MORANZONE

   When thy mother
   Heard my black news, she fell into a swoon,
   And, being with untimely travail seized—
   Bare thee into the world before thy time,
   And then her soul went heavenward, to wait
   Thy father, at the gates of Paradise.

GUIDO

   A mother dead, a father sold and bartered!
   I seem to stand on some beleaguered wall,
   And messenger comes after messenger
   With a new tale of terror; give me breath,
   Mine ears are tired.

MORANZONE

   When thy mother died,
   Fearing our enemies, I gave it out
   Thou wert dead also, and then privily
   Conveyed thee to an ancient servitor,
   Who by Perugia lived; the rest thou knowest.

GUIDO

   Saw you my father afterwards?

MORANZONE

   Ay! once;
   In mean attire, like a vineyard dresser,
   I stole to Rimini.

GUIDO [_taking his hand_]

   O generous heart!

MORANZONE

   One can buy everything in Rimini,
   And so I bought the gaolers! when your father
   Heard that a man child had been born to him,
   His noble face lit up beneath his helm
   Like a great fire seen far out at sea,
   And taking my two hands, he bade me, Guido,
   To rear you worthy of him; so I have reared you
   To revenge his death upon the friend who sold him.

GUIDO

   Thou hast done well; I for my father thank thee.
   And now his name?

MORANZONE

   How you remind me of him,
   You have each gesture that your father had.

GUIDO

   The traitor’s name?

MORANZONE

   Thou wilt hear that anon;
   The Duke and other nobles at the Court
   Are coming hither.

GUIDO

   What of that? his name?

MORANZONE

   Do they not seem a valiant company
   Of honourable, honest gentlemen?

GUIDO

   His name, milord?

[_Enter the_ DUKE OF PADUA _with_ COUNT BARDI, MAFFIO, PETRUCCI, _and
other gentlemen of his Court_.]

MORANZONE [_quickly_]

   The man to whom I kneel
   Is he who sold your father! mark me well.

GUIDO [_clutches hit dagger_]

   The Duke!

MORANZONE

   Leave off that fingering of thy knife.
   Hast thou so soon forgotten?  [_Kneels to the_ DUKE.]
   My noble Lord.

DUKE

   Welcome, Count Moranzone; ’tis some time
   Since we have seen you here in Padua.
   We hunted near your castle yesterday—
   Call you it castle? that bleak house of yours
   Wherein you sit a-mumbling o’er your beads,
   Telling your vices like a good old man.

                             [_Catches sight of_ GUIDO _and starts back_.]

   Who is that?

MORANZONE

   My sister’s son, your Grace,
   Who being now of age to carry arms,
   Would for a season tarry at your Court

DUKE [_still looking at_ GUIDO]

   What is his name?

MORANZONE

   Guido Ferranti, sir.

DUKE

   His city?

MORANZONE

   He is Mantuan by birth.

DUKE [_advancing towards_ GUIDO]

   You have the eyes of one I used to know,
   But he died childless.  Are you honest, boy?
   Then be not spendthrift of your honesty,
   But keep it to yourself; in Padua
   Men think that honesty is ostentatious, so
   It is not of the fashion.  Look at these lords.

COUNT BARDI [_aside_]

   Here is some bitter arrow for us, sure.

DUKE

   Why, every man among them has his price,
   Although, to do them justice, some of them
   Are quite expensive.

COUNT BARDI [_aside_]

   There it comes indeed.

DUKE

   So be not honest; eccentricity
   Is not a thing should ever be encouraged,
   Although, in this dull stupid age of ours,
   The most eccentric thing a man can do
   Is to have brains, then the mob mocks at him;
   And for the mob, despise it as I do,
   I hold its bubble praise and windy favours
   In such account, that popularity
   Is the one insult I have never suffered.

MAFFIO [_aside_]

   He has enough of hate, if he needs that.

DUKE

   Have prudence; in your dealings with the world
   Be not too hasty; act on the second thought,
   First impulses are generally good.

GUIDO [_aside_]

   Surely a toad sits on his lips, and spills its venom there.

DUKE

   See thou hast enemies,
   Else will the world think very little of thee;
   It is its test of power; yet see thou show’st
   A smiling mask of friendship to all men,
   Until thou hast them safely in thy grip,
   Then thou canst crush them.

GUIDO [_aside_]

   O wise philosopher!
   That for thyself dost dig so deep a grave.

MORANZONE [_to him_]

   Dost thou mark his words?

GUIDO

   Oh, be thou sure I do.

DUKE

   And be not over-scrupulous; clean hands
   With nothing in them make a sorry show.
   If you would have the lion’s share of life
   You must wear the fox’s skin.  Oh, it will fit you;
   It is a coat which fitteth every man.

GUIDO

   Your Grace, I shall remember.

DUKE

   That is well, boy, well.
   I would not have about me shallow fools,
   Who with mean scruples weigh the gold of life,
   And faltering, paltering, end by failure; failure,
   The only crime which I have not committed:
   I would have _men_ about me.  As for conscience,
   Conscience is but the name which cowardice
   Fleeing from battle scrawls upon its shield.
   You understand me, boy?

GUIDO

   I do, your Grace,
   And will in all things carry out the creed
   Which you have taught me.

MAFFIO

   I never heard your Grace
   So much in the vein for preaching; let the Cardinal
   Look to his laurels, sir.

DUKE

   The Cardinal!
   Men follow my creed, and they gabble his.
   I do not think much of the Cardinal;
   Although he is a holy churchman, and
   I quite admit his dulness.  Well, sir, from now
   We count you of our household

[_He holds out his hand for_ GUIDO _to kiss_.  GUIDO _starts back in
horror_, _but at a gesture from_ COUNT MORANZONE, _kneels and kisses
it_.]

   We will see
   That you are furnished with such equipage
   As doth befit your honour and our state.

GUIDO

   I thank your Grace most heartily.

DUKE

   Tell me again
   What is your name?

GUIDO

   Guido Ferranti, sir.

DUKE

   And you are Mantuan?  Look to your wives, my lords,
   When such a gallant comes to Padua.
   Thou dost well to laugh, Count Bardi; I have noted
   How merry is that husband by whose hearth
   Sits an uncomely wife.

MAFFIO

   May it please your Grace,
   The wives of Padua are above suspicion.

DUKE

   What, are they so ill-favoured!  Let us go,
   This Cardinal detains our pious Duchess;
   His sermon and his beard want cutting both:
   Will you come with us, sir, and hear a text
   From holy Jerome?

MORANZONE [_bowing_]

   My liege, there are some matters—

DUKE [_interrupting_]

   Thou need’st make no excuse for missing mass.
   Come, gentlemen.

                                   [_Exit with his suite into Cathedral_.]

GUIDO [_after a pause_]

   So the Duke sold my father;
   I kissed his hand.

MORANZONE

   Thou shalt do that many times.

GUIDO

   Must it be so?

MORANZONE

   Ay! thou hast sworn an oath.

GUIDO

   That oath shall make me marble.

MORANZONE

   Farewell, boy,
   Thou wilt not see me till the time is ripe.

GUIDO

   I pray thou comest quickly.

MORANZONE

   I will come
   When it is time; be ready.

GUIDO

   Fear me not.

MORANZONE

   Here is your friend; see that you banish him
   Both from your heart and Padua.

GUIDO

   From Padua,
   Not from my heart.

MORANZONE

   Nay, from thy heart as well,
   I will not leave thee till I see thee do it.

GUIDO

   Can I have no friend?

MORANZONE

   Revenge shall be thy friend;
   Thou need’st no other.

GUIDO

   Well, then be it so.

                                             [_Enter_ ASCANIO CRISTOFANO.]

ASCANIO

   Come, Guido, I have been beforehand with you in everything, for I have
   drunk a flagon of wine, eaten a pasty, and kissed the maid who served
   it.  Why, you look as melancholy as a schoolboy who cannot buy apples,
   or a politician who cannot sell his vote.  What news, Guido, what
   news?

GUIDO

   Why, that we two must part, Ascanio.

ASCANIO

   That would be news indeed, but it is not true.

GUIDO

   Too true it is, you must get hence, Ascanio,
   And never look upon my face again.

ASCANIO

   No, no; indeed you do not know me, Guido;
   ’Tis true I am a common yeoman’s son,
   Nor versed in fashions of much courtesy;
   But, if you are nobly born, cannot I be
   Your serving man?  I will tend you with more love
   Than any hired servant.

GUIDO [_clasping his hand_]

   Ascanio!

     [_Sees_ MORANZONE _looking at him and drops_ ASCANIO’S _hand_.]

   It cannot be.

ASCANIO

   What, is it so with you?
   I thought the friendship of the antique world
   Was not yet dead, but that the Roman type
   Might even in this poor and common age
   Find counterparts of love; then by this love
   Which beats between us like a summer sea,
   Whatever lot has fallen to your hand
   May I not share it?

GUIDO

   Share it?

ASCANIO

   Ay!

GUIDO

   No, no.

ASCANIO

   Have you then come to some inheritance
   Of lordly castle, or of stored-up gold?

GUIDO [_bitterly_]

   Ay! I have come to my inheritance.
   O bloody legacy! and O murderous dole!
   Which, like the thrifty miser, must I hoard,
   And to my own self keep; and so, I pray you,
   Let us part here.

ASCANIO

   What, shall we never more
   Sit hand in hand, as we were wont to sit,
   Over some book of ancient chivalry
   Stealing a truant holiday from school,
   Follow the huntsmen through the autumn woods,
   And watch the falcons burst their tasselled jesses,
   When the hare breaks from covert.

GUIDO

   Never more.

ASCANIO

   Must I go hence without a word of love?

GUIDO

   You must go hence, and may love go with you.

ASCANIO

   You are unknightly, and ungenerous.

GUIDO

   Unknightly and ungenerous if you will.
   Why should we waste more words about the matter
   Let us part now.

ASCANIO

   Have you no message, Guido?

GUIDO

   None; my whole past was but a schoolboy’s dream;
   To-day my life begins.  Farewell.

ASCANIO

   Farewell [_exit slowly_.]

GUIDO

   Now are you satisfied?  Have you not seen
   My dearest friend, and my most loved companion,
   Thrust from me like a common kitchen knave!
   Oh, that I did it!  Are you not satisfied?

MORANZONE

   Ay! I am satisfied.  Now I go hence,
   Do not forget the sign, your father’s dagger,
   And do the business when I send it to you.

GUIDO

   Be sure I shall.  [_Exit_ LORD MORANZONE.]

GUIDO

   O thou eternal heaven!
   If there is aught of nature in my soul,
   Of gentle pity, or fond kindliness,
   Wither it up, blast it, bring it to nothing,
   Or if thou wilt not, then will I myself
   Cut pity with a sharp knife from my heart
   And strangle mercy in her sleep at night
   Lest she speak to me.  Vengeance there I have it.
   Be thou my comrade and my bedfellow,
   Sit by my side, ride to the chase with me,
   When I am weary sing me pretty songs,
   When I am light o’ heart, make jest with me,
   And when I dream, whisper into my ear
   The dreadful secret of a father’s murder—
   Did I say murder?  [_Draws his dagger_.]
   Listen, thou terrible God!
   Thou God that punishest all broken oaths,
   And bid some angel write this oath in fire,
   That from this hour, till my dear father’s murder
   In blood I have revenged, I do forswear
   The noble ties of honourable friendship,
   The noble joys of dear companionship,
   Affection’s bonds, and loyal gratitude,
   Ay, more, from this same hour I do forswear
   All love of women, and the barren thing
   Which men call beauty—

[_The organ peals in the Cathedral_, _and under a canopy of cloth of
silver tissue_, _borne by four pages in scarlet_, _the_ DUCHESS OF PADUA
_comes down the steps_; _as she passes across their eyes meet for a
moment_, _and as she leaves the stage she looks back at_ GUIDO, _and the
dagger falls from his hand_.]

   Oh! who is that?

A CITIZEN

   The Duchess of Padua!

ACT II


                                  SCENE

_A state room in the Ducal Palace_, _hung with tapestries representing
the Masque of Venus_; _a large door in the centre opens into a corridor
of red marble_, _through which one can see a view of Padua_; _a large
canopy is set_ (_R.C._) _with three thrones_, _one a little lower than
the others_; _the ceiling is made of long gilded beams_; _furniture of
the period_, _chairs covered with gilt leather_, _and buffets set with
gold and silver plate_, _and chests painted with mythological scenes_.
_A number of the courtiers is out on the corridor looking from it down
into the street below_; _from the street comes the roar of a mob and
cries of_ ‘_Death to the Duke_’: _after a little interval enter the Duke
very calmly_; _he is leaning on the arm of Guido Ferranti_; _with him
enters also the Lord Cardinal_; _the mob still shouting_.

DUKE

   No, my Lord Cardinal, I weary of her!
   Why, she is worse than ugly, she is good.

MAFFIO [_excitedly_]

   Your Grace, there are two thousand people there
   Who every moment grow more clamorous.

DUKE

   Tut, man, they waste their strength upon their lungs!
   People who shout so loud, my lords, do nothing;
   The only men I fear are silent men.

                                               [_A yell from the people_.]

   You see, Lord Cardinal, how my people love me.

                                                         [_Another yell_.]

   Go, Petrucci,
   And tell the captain of the guard below
   To clear the square.  Do you not hear me, sir?
   Do what I bid you.

                                                        [_Exit_ PETRUCCI.]

CARDINAL

   I beseech your Grace
   To listen to their grievances.

DUKE [_sitting on his throne_]

   Ay! the peaches
   Are not so big this year as they were last.
   I crave your pardon, my lord Cardinal,
   I thought you spake of peaches.

                                              [_A cheer from the people_.]

   What is that?

GUIDO [_rushes to the window_]

   The Duchess has gone forth into the square,
   And stands between the people and the guard,
   And will not let them shoot.

DUKE

   The devil take her!

GUIDO [_still at the window_]

   And followed by a dozen of the citizens
   Has come into the Palace.

DUKE [_starting up_]

   By Saint James,
   Our Duchess waxes bold!

BARDI

   Here comes the Duchess.

DUKE

   Shut that door there; this morning air is cold.

                                  [_They close the door on the corridor_.]

[_Enter the Duchess followed by a crowd of meanly dressed Citizens_.]

DUCHESS [_flinging herself upon her knees_]

   I do beseech your Grace to give us audience.

DUKE

   What are these grievances?

DUCHESS

   Alas, my Lord,
   Such common things as neither you nor I,
   Nor any of these noble gentlemen,
   Have ever need at all to think about;
   They say the bread, the very bread they eat,
   Is made of sorry chaff.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Ay! so it is,
   Nothing but chaff.

DUKE

   And very good food too,
   I give it to my horses.

DUCHESS [_restraining herself_]

   They say the water,
   Set in the public cisterns for their use,
   [Has, through the breaking of the aqueduct,]
   To stagnant pools and muddy puddles turned.

DUKE

   They should drink wine; water is quite unwholesome.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Alack, your Grace, the taxes which the customs
   Take at the city gate are grown so high
   We cannot buy wine.

DUKE

   Then you should bless the taxes

   Which make you temperate.

DUCHESS

   Think, while we sit
   In gorgeous pomp and state, gaunt poverty
   Creeps through their sunless lanes, and with sharp knives
   Cuts the warm throats of children stealthily
   And no word said.

THIRD CITIZEN

   Ay! marry, that is true,
   My little son died yesternight from hunger;
   He was but six years old; I am so poor,
   I cannot bury him.

DUKE

   If you are poor,
   Are you not blessed in that?  Why, poverty
   Is one of the Christian virtues,

                                                [_Turns to the_ CARDINAL.]

   Is it not?
   I know, Lord Cardinal, you have great revenues,
   Rich abbey-lands, and tithes, and large estates
   For preaching voluntary poverty.

DUCHESS

   Nay but, my lord the Duke, be generous;
   While we sit here within a noble house
   [With shaded porticoes against the sun,
   And walls and roofs to keep the winter out],
   There are many citizens of Padua
   Who in vile tenements live so full of holes,
   That the chill rain, the snow, and the rude blast,
   Are tenants also with them; others sleep
   Under the arches of the public bridges
   All through the autumn nights, till the wet mist
   Stiffens their limbs, and fevers come, and so—

DUKE

   And so they go to Abraham’s bosom, Madam.
   They should thank me for sending them to Heaven,
   If they are wretched here. [_To the_ CARDINAL.]
   Is it not said
   Somewhere in Holy Writ, that every man
   Should be contented with that state of life
   God calls him to?  Why should I change their state,
   Or meddle with an all-wise providence,
   Which has apportioned that some men should starve,
   And others surfeit?  I did not make the world.

FIRST CITIZEN

   He hath a hard heart.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Nay, be silent, neighbour;
   I think the Cardinal will speak for us.

CARDINAL

   True, it is Christian to bear misery,
   Yet it is Christian also to be kind,
   And there seem many evils in this town,
   Which in your wisdom might your Grace reform.

FIRST CITIZEN

   What is that word reform?  What does it mean?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Marry, it means leaving things as they are; I like it not.

DUKE

   Reform Lord Cardinal, did _you_ say reform?
   There is a man in Germany called Luther,
   Who would reform the Holy Catholic Church.
   Have you not made him heretic, and uttered
   Anathema, maranatha, against him?

CARDINAL [_rising from his seat_]

   He would have led the sheep out of the fold,
   We do but ask of you to feed the sheep.

DUKE

   When I have shorn their fleeces I may feed them.
   As for these rebels—  [DUCHESS _entreats him_.]

FIRST CITIZEN

   That is a kind word,
   He means to give us something.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Is that so?

DUKE

   These ragged knaves who come before us here,
   With mouths chock-full of treason.

THIRD CITIZEN

   Good my Lord,
   Fill up our mouths with bread; we’ll hold our tongues.

DUKE

   Ye shall hold your tongues, whether you starve or not.
   My lords, this age is so familiar grown,
   That the low peasant hardly doffs his hat,
   Unless you beat him; and the raw mechanic
   Elbows the noble in the public streets.

                                                      [_To the Citizens_.]

   Still as our gentle Duchess has so prayed us,
   And to refuse so beautiful a beggar
   Were to lack both courtesy and love,
   Touching your grievances, I promise this—

FIRST CITIZEN

   Marry, he will lighten the taxes!

SECOND CITIZEN

   Or a dole of bread, think you, for each man?

DUKE

   That, on next Sunday, the Lord Cardinal
   Shall, after Holy Mass, preach you a sermon
   Upon the Beauty of Obedience.

                                                      [_Citizens murmur_.]

FIRST CITIZEN

   I’ faith, that will not fill our stomachs!

SECOND CITIZEN

   A sermon is but a sorry sauce, when
   You have nothing to eat with it.

DUCHESS

   Poor people,
   You see I have no power with the Duke,
   But if you go into the court without,
   My almoner shall from my private purse,
   Divide a hundred ducats ’mongst you all.

FIRST CITIZEN

   God save the Duchess, say I.

SECOND CITIZEN

   God save her.

DUCHESS

   And every Monday morn shall bread be set
   For those who lack it.

                                          [_Citizens applaud and go out_.]

FIRST CITIZEN [_going out_]

   Why, God save the Duchess again!

DUKE [_calling him back_]

   Come hither, fellow! what is your name?

FIRST CITIZEN

   Dominick, sir.

DUKE

   A good name!  Why were you called Dominick?

FIRST CITIZEN [_scratching his head_]

   Marry, because I was born on St. George’s day.

DUKE

   A good reason! here is a ducat for you!
   Will you not cry for me God save the Duke?

FIRST CITIZEN [_feebly_]

   God save the Duke.

DUKE

   Nay! louder, fellow, louder.

FIRST CITIZEN [_a little louder_]

   God save the Duke!

DUKE

   More lustily, fellow, put more heart in it!
   Here is another ducat for you.

FIRST CITIZEN [_enthusiastically_]

   God save the Duke!

DUKE [_mockingly_]

   Why, gentlemen, this simple fellow’s love
   Touches me much.  [_To the Citizen_, _harshly_.]
   Go!  [_Exit Citizen_, _bowing_.]
   This is the way, my lords,
   You can buy popularity nowadays.
   Oh, we are nothing if not democratic!

                                                       [_To the_ DUCHESS.]

   Well, Madam,
   You spread rebellion ’midst our citizens.

DUCHESS

   My Lord, the poor have rights you cannot touch,
   The right to pity, and the right to mercy.

DUKE

   So, so, you argue with me?  This is she,
   The gentle Duchess for whose hand I yielded
   Three of the fairest towns in Italy,
   Pisa, and Genoa, and Orvieto.

DUCHESS

   Promised, my Lord, not yielded: in that matter
   Brake you your word as ever.

DUKE

   You wrong us, Madam,
   There were state reasons.

DUCHESS

   What state reasons are there
   For breaking holy promises to a state?

DUKE

   There are wild boars at Pisa in a forest
   Close to the city: when I promised Pisa
   Unto your noble and most trusting father,
   I had forgotten there was hunting there.
   At Genoa they say,
   Indeed I doubt them not, that the red mullet
   Runs larger in the harbour of that town
   Than anywhere in Italy.

                                          [_Turning to one of the Court_.]

   You, my lord,
   Whose gluttonous appetite is your only god,
   Could satisfy our Duchess on that point.

DUCHESS

   And Orvieto?

DUKE [_yawning_]

   I cannot now recall
   Why I did not surrender Orvieto
   According to the word of my contract.
   Maybe it was because I did not choose.

                                             [_Goes over to the_ DUCHESS.]

   Why look you, Madam, you are here alone;
   ’Tis many a dusty league to your grey France,
   And even there your father barely keeps
   A hundred ragged squires for his Court.
   What hope have you, I say?  Which of these lords
   And noble gentlemen of Padua
   Stands by your side.

DUCHESS

   There is not one.

                                [GUIDO _starts_, _but restrains himself_.]

DUKE

   Nor shall be,
   While I am Duke in Padua: listen, Madam,
   Being mine own, you shall do as I will,
   And if it be my will you keep the house,
   Why then, this palace shall your prison be;
   And if it be my will you walk abroad,
   Why, you shall take the air from morn to night.

DUCHESS

   Sir, by what right—?

DUKE

   Madam, my second Duchess
   Asked the same question once: her monument
   Lies in the chapel of Bartholomew,
   Wrought in red marble; very beautiful.
   Guido, your arm.  Come, gentlemen, let us go
   And spur our falcons for the mid-day chase.
   Bethink you, Madam, you are here alone.

         [_Exit the_ DUKE _leaning on_ GUIDO, _with his Court_.]

DUCHESS [_looking after them_]

   The Duke said rightly that I was alone;
   Deserted, and dishonoured, and defamed,
   Stood ever woman so alone indeed?
   Men when they woo us call us pretty children,
   Tell us we have not wit to make our lives,
   And so they mar them for us.  Did I say woo?
   We are their chattels, and their common slaves,
   Less dear than the poor hound that licks their hand,
   Less fondled than the hawk upon their wrist.
   Woo, did I say? bought rather, sold and bartered,
   Our very bodies being merchandise.
   I know it is the general lot of women,
   Each miserably mated to some man
   Wrecks her own life upon his selfishness:
   That it is general makes it not less bitter.
   I think I never heard a woman laugh,
   Laugh for pure merriment, except one woman,
   That was at night time, in the public streets.
   Poor soul, she walked with painted lips, and wore
   The mask of pleasure: I would not laugh like her;
   No, death were better.

[_Enter_ GUIDO _behind unobserved_; _the_ DUCHESS _flings herself down
before a picture of the Madonna_.]

   O Mary mother, with your sweet pale face
   Bending between the little angel heads
   That hover round you, have you no help for me?
   Mother of God, have you no help for me?

GUIDO

   I can endure no longer.
   This is my love, and I will speak to her.
   Lady, am I a stranger to your prayers?

DUCHESS [_rising_]

   None but the wretched needs my prayers, my lord.

GUIDO

   Then must I need them, lady.

DUCHESS

   How is that?
   Does not the Duke show thee sufficient honour?

GUIDO

   Your Grace, I lack no favours from the Duke,
   Whom my soul loathes as I loathe wickedness,
   But come to proffer on my bended knees,
   My loyal service to thee unto death.

DUCHESS

   Alas!  I am so fallen in estate
   I can but give thee a poor meed of thanks.

GUIDO [_seizing her hand_]

   Hast thou no love to give me?

        [_The_ DUCHESS _starts_, _and_ GUIDO _falls at her feet_.]

   O dear saint,
   If I have been too daring, pardon me!
   Thy beauty sets my boyish blood aflame,
   And, when my reverent lips touch thy white hand,
   Each little nerve with such wild passion thrills
   That there is nothing which I would not do
   To gain thy love.  [_Leaps up_.]
   Bid me reach forth and pluck
   Perilous honour from the lion’s jaws,
   And I will wrestle with the Nemean beast
   On the bare desert!  Fling to the cave of War
   A gaud, a ribbon, a dead flower, something
   That once has touched thee, and I’ll bring it back
   Though all the hosts of Christendom were there,
   Inviolate again! ay, more than this,
   Set me to scale the pallid white-faced cliffs
   Of mighty England, and from that arrogant shield
   Will I raze out the lilies of your France
   Which England, that sea-lion of the sea,
   Hath taken from her!
   O dear Beatrice,
   Drive me not from thy presence! without thee
   The heavy minutes crawl with feet of lead,
   But, while I look upon thy loveliness,
   The hours fly like winged Mercuries
   And leave existence golden.

DUCHESS

   I did not think
   I should be ever loved: do you indeed
   Love me so much as now you say you do?

GUIDO

   Ask of the sea-bird if it loves the sea,
   Ask of the roses if they love the rain,
   Ask of the little lark, that will not sing
   Till day break, if it loves to see the day:—
   And yet, these are but empty images,
   Mere shadows of my love, which is a fire
   So great that all the waters of the main
   Can not avail to quench it.  Will you not speak?

DUCHESS

   I hardly know what I should say to you.

GUIDO

   Will you not say you love me?

DUCHESS

   Is that my lesson?
   Must I say all at once?  ’Twere a good lesson
   If I did love you, sir; but, if I do not,
   What shall I say then?

GUIDO

   If you do not love me,
   Say, none the less, you do, for on your tongue
   Falsehood for very shame would turn to truth.

DUCHESS

   What if I do not speak at all?  They say
   Lovers are happiest when they are in doubt

GUIDO

   Nay, doubt would kill me, and if I must die,
   Why, let me die for joy and not for doubt.
   Oh, tell me may I stay, or must I go?

DUCHESS

   I would not have you either stay or go;
   For if you stay you steal my love from me,
   And if you go you take my love away.
   Guido, though all the morning stars could sing
   They could not tell the measure of my love.
   I love you, Guido.

GUIDO [_stretching out his hands_]

   Oh, do not cease at all;
   I thought the nightingale sang but at night;
   Or if thou needst must cease, then let my lips
   Touch the sweet lips that can such music make.

DUCHESS

   To touch my lips is not to touch my heart.

GUIDO

   Do you close that against me?

DUCHESS

   Alas! my lord,
   I have it not: the first day that I saw you
   I let you take my heart away from me;
   Unwilling thief, that without meaning it
   Did break into my fenced treasury
   And filch my jewel from it!  O strange theft,
   Which made you richer though you knew it not,
   And left me poorer, and yet glad of it!

GUIDO [_clasping her in his arms_]

   O love, love, love!  Nay, sweet, lift up your head,
   Let me unlock those little scarlet doors
   That shut in music, let me dive for coral
   In your red lips, and I’ll bear back a prize
   Richer than all the gold the Gryphon guards
   In rude Armenia.

DUCHESS

   You are my lord,
   And what I have is yours, and what I have not
   Your fancy lends me, like a prodigal
   Spending its wealth on what is nothing worth.

                                                           [_Kisses him_.]

GUIDO

   Methinks I am bold to look upon you thus:
   The gentle violet hides beneath its leaf
   And is afraid to look at the great sun
   For fear of too much splendour, but my eyes,
   O daring eyes! are grown so venturous
   That like fixed stars they stand, gazing at you,
   And surfeit sense with beauty.

DUCHESS

   Dear love, I would
   You could look upon me ever, for your eyes
   Are polished mirrors, and when I peer
   Into those mirrors I can see myself,
   And so I know my image lives in you.

GUIDO [_taking her in his arms_]

   Stand still, thou hurrying orb in the high heavens,
   And make this hour immortal!  [_A pause_.]

DUCHESS

   Sit down here,
   A little lower than me: yes, just so, sweet,
   That I may run my fingers through your hair,
   And see your face turn upwards like a flower
   To meet my kiss.
   Have you not sometimes noted,
   When we unlock some long-disuséd room
   With heavy dust and soiling mildew filled,
   Where never foot of man has come for years,
   And from the windows take the rusty bar,
   And fling the broken shutters to the air,
   And let the bright sun in, how the good sun
   Turns every grimy particle of dust
   Into a little thing of dancing gold?
   Guido, my heart is that long-empty room,
   But you have let love in, and with its gold
   Gilded all life.  Do you not think that love
   Fills up the sum of life?

GUIDO

   Ay! without love
   Life is no better than the unhewn stone
   Which in the quarry lies, before the sculptor
   Has set the God within it.  Without love
   Life is as silent as the common reeds
   That through the marshes or by rivers grow,
   And have no music in them.

DUCHESS

   Yet out of these
   The singer, who is Love, will make a pipe
   And from them he draws music; so I think
   Love will bring music out of any life.
   Is that not true?

GUIDO

   Sweet, women make it true.
   There are men who paint pictures, and carve statues,
   Paul of Verona and the dyer’s son,
   Or their great rival, who, by the sea at Venice,
   Has set God’s little maid upon the stair,
   White as her own white lily, and as tall,
   Or Raphael, whose Madonnas are divine
   Because they are mothers merely; yet I think
   Women are the best artists of the world,
   For they can take the common lives of men
   Soiled with the money-getting of our age,
   And with love make them beautiful.

DUCHESS

   Ah, dear,
   I wish that you and I were very poor;
   The poor, who love each other, are so rich.

GUIDO

   Tell me again you love me, Beatrice.

DUCHESS [_fingering his collar_]

   How well this collar lies about your throat.

   [LORD MORANZONE _looks through the door from the corridor outside_.]

GUIDO

   Nay, tell me that you love me.

DUCHESS

   I remember,
   That when I was a child in my dear France,
   Being at Court at Fontainebleau, the King
   Wore such a collar.

GUIDO

   Will you not say you love me?

DUCHESS [_smiling_]

   He was a very royal man, King Francis,
   Yet he was not royal as you are.
   Why need I tell you, Guido, that I love you?

      [_Takes his head in her hands and turns his face up to her_.]

   Do you not know that I am yours for ever,
   Body and soul?

 [_Kisses him_, _and then suddenly catches sight of_ MORANZONE _and leaps
                                  up_.]

   Oh, what is that?  [MORANZONE _disappears_.]

GUIDO

   What, love?

DUCHESS

   Methought I saw a face with eyes of flame
   Look at us through the doorway.

GUIDO

   Nay, ’twas nothing:
   The passing shadow of the man on guard.

          [_The_ DUCHESS _still stands looking at the window_.]

   ’Twas nothing, sweet.

DUCHESS

   Ay! what can harm us now,
   Who are in Love’s hand?  I do not think I’d care
   Though the vile world should with its lackey Slander
   Trample and tread upon my life; why should I?
   They say the common field-flowers of the field
   Have sweeter scent when they are trodden on
   Than when they bloom alone, and that some herbs
   Which have no perfume, on being bruiséd die
   With all Arabia round them; so it is
   With the young lives this dull world seeks to crush,
   It does but bring the sweetness out of them,
   And makes them lovelier often.  And besides,
   While we have love we have the best of life:
   Is it not so?

GUIDO

   Dear, shall we play or sing?
   I think that I could sing now.

DUCHESS

   Do not speak,
   For there are times when all existences
   Seem narrowed to one single ecstasy,
   And Passion sets a seal upon the lips.

GUIDO

   Oh, with mine own lips let me break that seal!
   You love me, Beatrice?

DUCHESS

   Ay! is it not strange
   I should so love mine enemy?

GUIDO

   Who is he?

DUCHESS

   Why, you: that with your shaft did pierce my heart!
   Poor heart, that lived its little lonely life
   Until it met your arrow.

GUIDO

   Ah, dear love,
   I am so wounded by that bolt myself
   That with untended wounds I lie a-dying,
   Unless you cure me, dear Physician.

DUCHESS

   I would not have you cured; for I am sick
   With the same malady.

GUIDO

   Oh, how I love you!
   See, I must steal the cuckoo’s voice, and tell
   The one tale over.

DUCHESS

   Tell no other tale!
   For, if that is the little cuckoo’s song,
   The nightingale is hoarse, and the loud lark
   Has lost its music.

GUIDO

   Kiss me, Beatrice!

[_She takes his face in her hands and bends down and kisses him_; _a loud
knocking then comes at the door_, _and_ GUIDO _leaps up_; _enter a
Servant_.]

SERVANT

   A package for you, sir.

GUIDO [_carelessly_]

   Ah! give it to me.

   [_Servant hands package wrapped in vermilion silk_, _and exit_; _as_
   GUIDO _is about to open it the_ DUCHESS _comes up behind_, _and in
   sport takes it from him_.]

DUCHESS [_laughing_]

   Now I will wager it is from some girl
   Who would have you wear her favour; I am so jealous
   I will not give up the least part in you,
   But like a miser keep you to myself,
   And spoil you perhaps in keeping.

GUIDO

   It is nothing.

DUCHESS

   Nay, it is from some girl.

GUIDO

   You know ’tis not.

DUCHESS [_turns her back and opens it_]

   Now, traitor, tell me what does this sign mean,
   A dagger with two leopards wrought in steel?

GUIDO [_taking it from her_]

   O God!

DUCHESS

   I’ll from the window look, and try
   If I can’t see the porter’s livery
   Who left it at the gate!  I will not rest
   Till I have learned your secret.

                                      [_Runs laughing into the corridor_.]

GUIDO

   Oh, horrible!
   Had I so soon forgot my father’s death,
   Did I so soon let love into my heart,
   And must I banish love, and let in murder
   That beats and clamours at the outer gate?
   Ay, that I must!  Have I not sworn an oath?
   Yet not to-night; nay, it must be to-night.
   Farewell then all the joy and light of life,
   All dear recorded memories, farewell,
   Farewell all love!  Could I with bloody hands
   Fondle and paddle with her innocent hands?
   Could I with lips fresh from this butchery
   Play with her lips?  Could I with murderous eyes
   Look in those violet eyes, whose purity
   Would strike men blind, and make each eyeball reel
   In night perpetual?  No, murder has set
   A barrier between us far too high
   For us to kiss across it.

DUCHESS

   Guido!

GUIDO

   Beatrice,
   You must forget that name, and banish me
   Out of your life for ever.

DUCHESS [_going towards him_]

   O dear love!

GUIDO [_stepping back_]

   There lies a barrier between us two
   We dare not pass.

DUCHESS

   I dare do anything
   So that you are beside me.

GUIDO

   Ah!  There it is,
   I cannot be beside you, cannot breathe
   The air you breathe; I cannot any more
   Stand face to face with beauty, which unnerves
   My shaking heart, and makes my desperate hand
   Fail of its purpose.  Let me go hence, I pray;
   Forget you ever looked upon me.

DUCHESS

   What!
   With your hot kisses fresh upon my lips
   Forget the vows of love you made to me?

GUIDO

   I take them back.

DUCHESS

   Alas, you cannot, Guido,
   For they are part of nature now; the air
   Is tremulous with their music, and outside
   The little birds sing sweeter for those vows.

GUIDO

   There lies a barrier between us now,
   Which then I knew not, or I had forgot.

DUCHESS

   There is no barrier, Guido; why, I will go
   In poor attire, and will follow you
   Over the world.

GUIDO [_wildly_]

   The world’s not wide enough
   To hold us two!  Farewell, farewell for ever.

DUCHESS [_calm_, _and controlling her passion_]

   Why did you come into my life at all, then,
   Or in the desolate garden of my heart
   Sow that white flower of love—?

GUIDO

   O Beatrice!

DUCHESS

   Which now you would dig up, uproot, tear out,
   Though each small fibre doth so hold my heart
   That if you break one, my heart breaks with it?
   Why did you come into my life?  Why open
   The secret wells of love I had sealed up?
   Why did you open them—?

GUIDO

   O God!

DUCHESS [_clenching her hand_]

   And let
   The floodgates of my passion swell and burst
   Till, like the wave when rivers overflow
   That sweeps the forest and the farm away,
   Love in the splendid avalanche of its might
   Swept my life with it?  Must I drop by drop
   Gather these waters back and seal them up?
   Alas!  Each drop will be a tear, and so
   Will with its saltness make life very bitter.

GUIDO

   I pray you speak no more, for I must go
   Forth from your life and love, and make a way
   On which you cannot follow.

DUCHESS

   I have heard
   That sailors dying of thirst upon a raft,
   Poor castaways upon a lonely sea,
   Dream of green fields and pleasant water-courses,
   And then wake up with red thirst in their throats,
   And die more miserably because sleep
   Has cheated them: so they die cursing sleep
   For having sent them dreams: I will not curse you
   Though I am cast away upon the sea
   Which men call Desolation.

GUIDO

   O God, God!

DUCHESS

   But you will stay: listen, I love you, Guido.

                                                   [_She waits a little_.]

   Is echo dead, that when I say I love you
   There is no answer?

GUIDO

   Everything is dead,
   Save one thing only, which shall die to-night!

DUCHESS

   If you are going, touch me not, but go.

                                                           [_Exit_ GUIDO.]

   Barrier!  Barrier!
   Why did he say there was a barrier?
   There is no barrier between us two.
   He lied to me, and shall I for that reason
   Loathe what I love, and what I worshipped, hate?
   I think we women do not love like that.
   For if I cut his image from my heart,
   My heart would, like a bleeding pilgrim, follow
   That image through the world, and call it back
   With little cries of love.

  [_Enter_ DUKE _equipped for the chase_, _with falconers and hounds_.]

DUKE

   Madam, you keep us waiting;
   You keep my dogs waiting.

DUCHESS

   I will not ride to-day.

DUKE

   How now, what’s this?

DUCHESS

   My Lord, I cannot go.

DUKE

   What, pale face, do you dare to stand against me?
   Why, I could set you on a sorry jade
   And lead you through the town, till the low rabble
   You feed toss up their hats and mock at you.

DUCHESS

   Have you no word of kindness ever for me?

DUKE

   I hold you in the hollow of my hand
   And have no need on you to waste kind words.

DUCHESS

   Well, I will go.

DUKE [_slapping his boot with his whip_]

   No, I have changed my mind,
   You will stay here, and like a faithful wife
   Watch from the window for our coming back.
   Were it not dreadful if some accident
   By chance should happen to your loving Lord?
   Come, gentlemen, my hounds begin to chafe,
   And I chafe too, having a patient wife.
   Where is young Guido?

MAFFIO

   My liege, I have not seen him
   For a full hour past.

DUKE

   It matters not,
   I dare say I shall see him soon enough.
   Well, Madam, you will sit at home and spin.
   I do protest, sirs, the domestic virtues
   Are often very beautiful in others.

                                           [_Exit_ DUKE _with his Court_.]

DUCHESS

   The stars have fought against me, that is all,
   And thus to-night when my Lord lieth asleep,
   Will I fall upon my dagger, and so cease.
   My heart is such a stone nothing can reach it
   Except the dagger’s edge: let it go there,
   To find what name it carries: ay! to-night
   Death will divorce the Duke; and yet to-night
   He may die also, he is very old.
   Why should he not die?  Yesterday his hand
   Shook with a palsy: men have died from palsy,
   And why not he?  Are there not fevers also,
   Agues and chills, and other maladies
   Most incident to old age?
   No, no, he will not die, he is too sinful;
   Honest men die before their proper time.
   Good men will die: men by whose side the Duke
   In all the sick pollution of his life
   Seems like a leper: women and children die,
   But the Duke will not die, he is too sinful.
   Oh, can it be
   There is some immortality in sin,
   Which virtue has not?  And does the wicked man
   Draw life from what to other men were death,
   Like poisonous plants that on corruption live?
   No, no, I think God would not suffer that:
   Yet the Duke will not die: he is too sinful.
   But I will die alone, and on this night
   Grim Death shall be my bridegroom, and the tomb
   My secret house of pleasure: well, what of that?
   The world’s a graveyard, and we each, like coffins,
   Within us bear a skeleton.

[_Enter_ LORD MORANZONE _all in black_; _he passes across the back of the
                     stage looking anxiously about_.]

MORANZONE

   Where is Guido?
   I cannot find him anywhere.

DUCHESS [_catches sight of him_]

   O God!
   ’Twas thou who took my love away from me.

MORANZONE [_with a look of joy_]

   What, has he left you?

DUCHESS

   Nay, you know he has.
   Oh, give him back to me, give him back, I say,
   Or I will tear your body limb from limb,
   And to the common gibbet nail your head
   Until the carrion crows have stripped it bare.
   Better you had crossed a hungry lioness
   Before you came between me and my love.

                                                     [_With more pathos_.]

   Nay, give him back, you know not how I love him.
   Here by this chair he knelt a half hour since;
   ’Twas there he stood, and there he looked at me;
   This is the hand he kissed, and these the ears
   Into whose open portals he did pour
   A tale of love so musical that all
   The birds stopped singing!  Oh, give him back to me.

MORANZONE

   He does not love you, Madam.

DUCHESS

   May the plague
   Wither the tongue that says so!  Give him back.

MORANZONE

   Madam, I tell you you will never see him,
   Neither to-night, nor any other night.

DUCHESS

   What is your name?

MORANZONE

   My name?  Revenge!

                                                                 [_Exit_.]

DUCHESS

   Revenge!
   I think I never harmed a little child.
   What should Revenge do coming to my door?
   It matters not, for Death is there already,
   Waiting with his dim torch to light my way.
   ’Tis true men hate thee, Death, and yet I think
   Thou wilt be kinder to me than my lover,
   And so dispatch the messengers at once,
   Harry the lazy steeds of lingering day,
   And let the night, thy sister, come instead,
   And drape the world in mourning; let the owl,
   Who is thy minister, scream from his tower
   And wake the toad with hooting, and the bat,
   That is the slave of dim Persephone,
   Wheel through the sombre air on wandering wing!
   Tear up the shrieking mandrakes from the earth
   And bid them make us music, and tell the mole
   To dig deep down thy cold and narrow bed,
   For I shall lie within thine arms to-night.

ACT III


                                  SCENE

_A large corridor in the Ducal Palace_: _a window_ (_L.C._) _looks out on
a view of Padua by moonlight_: _a staircase_ (_R.C._) _leads up to a door
with a portière of crimson velvet_, _with the Duke’s arms embroidered in
gold on it_: _on the lowest step of the staircase a figure draped in
black is sitting_: _the hall is lit by an iron cresset filled with
burning tow_: _thunder and lightning outside_: _the time is night_.

                  [_Enter_ GUIDO _through the window_.]

GUIDO

   The wind is rising: how my ladder shook!
   I thought that every gust would break the cords!

                                                [_Looks out at the city_.]

   Christ!  What a night:
   Great thunder in the heavens, and wild lightnings
   Striking from pinnacle to pinnacle
   Across the city, till the dim houses seem
   To shudder and to shake as each new glare
   Dashes adown the street.

                         [_Passes across the stage to foot of staircase_.]

   Ah! who art thou
   That sittest on the stair, like unto Death
   Waiting a guilty soul?  [_A pause_.]
   Canst thou not speak?
   Or has this storm laid palsy on thy tongue,
   And chilled thy utterance?

                              [_The figure rises and takes off his mask_.]

MORANZONE

   Guido Ferranti,
   Thy murdered father laughs for joy to-night.

GUIDO [_confusedly_]

   What, art thou here?

MORANZONE

   Ay, waiting for your coming.

GUIDO [_looking away from him_]

   I did not think to see you, but am glad,
   That you may know the thing I mean to do.

MORANZONE

   First, I would have you know my well-laid plans;
   Listen: I have set horses at the gate
   Which leads to Parma: when you have done your business
   We will ride hence, and by to-morrow night—

GUIDO

   It cannot be.

MORANZONE

   Nay, but it shall.

GUIDO

   Listen, Lord Moranzone,
   I am resolved not to kill this man.

MORANZONE

   Surely my ears are traitors, speak again:
   It cannot be but age has dulled my powers,
   I am an old man now: what did you say?
   You said that with that dagger in your belt
   You would avenge your father’s bloody murder;
   Did you not say that?

GUIDO

   No, my lord, I said
   I was resolved not to kill the Duke.

MORANZONE

   You said not that; it is my senses mock me;
   Or else this midnight air o’ercharged with storm
   Alters your message in the giving it.

GUIDO

   Nay, you heard rightly; I’ll not kill this man.

MORANZONE

   What of thine oath, thou traitor, what of thine oath?

GUIDO

   I am resolved not to keep that oath.

MORANZONE

   What of thy murdered father?

GUIDO

   Dost thou think
   My father would be glad to see me coming,
   This old man’s blood still hot upon mine hands?

MORANZONE

   Ay! he would laugh for joy.

GUIDO

   I do not think so,
   There is better knowledge in the other world;
   Vengeance is God’s, let God himself revenge.

MORANZONE

   Thou art God’s minister of vengeance.

GUIDO

   No!
   God hath no minister but his own hand.
   I will not kill this man.

MORANZONE

   Why are you here,
   If not to kill him, then?

GUIDO

   Lord Moranzone,
   I purpose to ascend to the Duke’s chamber,
   And as he lies asleep lay on his breast
   The dagger and this writing; when he awakes
   Then he will know who held him in his power
   And slew him not: this is the noblest vengeance
   Which I can take.

MORANZONE

   You will not slay him?

GUIDO

   No.

MORANZONE

   Ignoble son of a noble father,
   Who sufferest this man who sold that father
   To live an hour.

GUIDO

   ’Twas thou that hindered me;
   I would have killed him in the open square,
   The day I saw him first.

MORANZONE

   It was not yet time;
   Now it is time, and, like some green-faced girl,
   Thou pratest of forgiveness.

GUIDO

   No! revenge:
   The right revenge my father’s son should take.

MORANZONE

   You are a coward,
   Take out the knife, get to the Duke’s chamber,
   And bring me back his heart upon the blade.
   When he is dead, then you can talk to me
   Of noble vengeances.

GUIDO

   Upon thine honour,
   And by the love thou bearest my father’s name,
   Dost thou think my father, that great gentleman,
   That generous soldier, that most chivalrous lord,
   Would have crept at night-time, like a common thief,
   And stabbed an old man sleeping in his bed,
   However he had wronged him: tell me that.

MORANZONE

[after some hesitation]

   You have sworn an oath, see that you keep that oath.
   Boy, do you think I do not know your secret,
   Your traffic with the Duchess?

GUIDO

   Silence, liar!
   The very moon in heaven is not more chaste.
   Nor the white stars so pure.

MORANZONE

   And yet, you love her;
   Weak fool, to let love in upon your life,
   Save as a plaything.

GUIDO

   You do well to talk:
   Within your veins, old man, the pulse of youth
   Throbs with no ardour.  Your eyes full of rheum
   Have against Beauty closed their filmy doors,
   And your clogged ears, losing their natural sense,
   Have shut you from the music of the world.
   You talk of love!  You know not what it is.

MORANZONE

   Oh, in my time, boy, have I walked i’ the moon,
   Swore I would live on kisses and on blisses,
   Swore I would die for love, and did not die,
   Wrote love bad verses; ay, and sung them badly,
   Like all true lovers: Oh, I have done the tricks!
   I know the partings and the chamberings;
   We are all animals at best, and love
   Is merely passion with a holy name.

GUIDO

   Now then I know you have not loved at all.
   Love is the sacrament of life; it sets
   Virtue where virtue was not; cleanses men
   Of all the vile pollutions of this world;
   It is the fire which purges gold from dross,
   It is the fan which winnows wheat from chaff,
   It is the spring which in some wintry soil
   Makes innocence to blossom like a rose.
   The days are over when God walked with men,
   But Love, which is his image, holds his place.
   When a man loves a woman, then he knows
   God’s secret, and the secret of the world.
   There is no house so lowly or so mean,
   Which, if their hearts be pure who live in it,
   Love will not enter; but if bloody murder
   Knock at the Palace gate and is let in,
   Love like a wounded thing creeps out and dies.
   This is the punishment God sets on sin.
   The wicked cannot love.

               [_A groan comes from the_ DUKE’S _chamber_.]

   Ah!  What is that?
   Do you not hear?  ’Twas nothing.
   So I think
   That it is woman’s mission by their love
   To save the souls of men: and loving her,
   My Lady, my white Beatrice, I begin
   To see a nobler and a holier vengeance
   In letting this man live, than doth reside
   In bloody deeds o’ night, stabs in the dark,
   And young hands clutching at a palsied throat.
   It was, I think, for love’s sake that Lord Christ,
   Who was indeed himself incarnate Love,
   Bade every man forgive his enemy.

MORANZONE [_sneeringly_]

   That was in Palestine, not Padua;
   And said for saints: I have to do with men.

GUIDO

   It was for all time said.

MORANZONE

   And your white Duchess,
   What will she do to thank you?

GUIDO

   Alas, I will not see her face again.
   ’Tis but twelve hours since I parted from her,
   So suddenly, and with such violent passion,
   That she has shut her heart against me now:
   No, I will never see her.

MORANZONE

   What will you do?

GUIDO

   After that I have laid the dagger there,
   Get hence to-night from Padua.

MORANZONE

   And then?

GUIDO

   I will take service with the Doge at Venice,
   And bid him pack me straightway to the wars,
   And there I will, being now sick of life,
   Throw that poor life against some desperate spear.

                              [_A groan from the_ DUKE’S _chamber again_.]

   Did you not hear a voice?

MORANZONE

   I always hear,
   From the dim confines of some sepulchre,
   A voice that cries for vengeance.  We waste time,
   It will be morning soon; are you resolved
   You will not kill the Duke?

GUIDO

   I am resolved.

MORANZONE

   O wretched father, lying unavenged.

GUIDO

   More wretched, were thy son a murderer.

MORANZONE

   Why, what is life?

GUIDO

   I do not know, my lord,
   I did not give it, and I dare not take it.

MORANZONE

   I do not thank God often; but I think
   I thank him now that I have got no son!
   And you, what bastard blood flows in your veins
   That when you have your enemy in your grasp
   You let him go!  I would that I had left you
   With the dull hinds that reared you.

GUIDO

   Better perhaps
   That you had done so!  May be better still
   I’d not been born to this distressful world.

MORANZONE

   Farewell!

GUIDO

   Farewell!  Some day, Lord Moranzone,
   You will understand my vengeance.

MORANZONE

   Never, boy.

                           [_Gets out of window and exit by rope ladder_.]

GUIDO

   Father, I think thou knowest my resolve,
   And with this nobler vengeance art content.
   Father, I think in letting this man live
   That I am doing what thou wouldst have done.
   Father, I know not if a human voice
   Can pierce the iron gateway of the dead,
   Or if the dead are set in ignorance
   Of what we do, or do not, for their sakes.
   And yet I feel a presence in the air,
   There is a shadow standing at my side,
   And ghostly kisses seem to touch my lips,
   And leave them holier.  [_Kneels down_.]
   O father, if ’tis thou,
   Canst thou not burst through the decrees of death,
   And if corporeal semblance show thyself,
   That I may touch thy hand!
   No, there is nothing.  [_Rises_.]
   ’Tis the night that cheats us with its phantoms,
   And, like a puppet-master, makes us think
   That things are real which are not.  It grows late.
   Now must I to my business.

                     [_Pulls out a letter from his doublet and reads it_.]

   When he wakes,
   And sees this letter, and the dagger with it,
   Will he not have some loathing for his life,
   Repent, perchance, and lead a better life,
   Or will he mock because a young man spared
   His natural enemy?  I do not care.
   Father, it is thy bidding that I do,
   Thy bidding, and the bidding of my love
   Which teaches me to know thee as thou art.

[_Ascends staircase stealthily_, _and just as he reaches out his hand to
draw back the curtain the Duchess appears all in white_.  GUIDO _starts
back_.]

DUCHESS

   Guido! what do you here so late?

GUIDO

   O white and spotless angel of my life,
   Sure thou hast come from Heaven with a message
   That mercy is more noble than revenge?

DUCHESS

   There is no barrier between us now.

GUIDO

   None, love, nor shall be.

DUCHESS

   I have seen to that.

GUIDO

   Tarry here for me.

DUCHESS

   No, you are not going?
   You will not leave me as you did before?

GUIDO

   I will return within a moment’s space,
   But first I must repair to the Duke’s chamber,
   And leave this letter and this dagger there,
   That when he wakes—

DUCHESS

   When who wakes?

GUIDO

   Why, the Duke.

DUCHESS

   He will not wake again.

GUIDO

   What, is he dead?

DUCHESS

   Ay! he is dead.

GUIDO

   O God! how wonderful
   Are all thy secret ways!  Who would have said
   That on this very night, when I had yielded
   Into thy hands the vengeance that is thine,
   Thou with thy finger wouldst have touched the man,
   And bade him come before thy judgment seat.

DUCHESS

   I have just killed him.

GUIDO [_in horror_]

   Oh!

DUCHESS

   He was asleep;
   Come closer, love, and I will tell you all.
   I had resolved to kill myself to-night.
   About an hour ago I waked from sleep,
   And took my dagger from beneath my pillow,
   Where I had hidden it to serve my need,
   And drew it from the sheath, and felt the edge,
   And thought of you, and how I loved you, Guido,
   And turned to fall upon it, when I marked
   The old man sleeping, full of years and sin;
   There lay he muttering curses in his sleep,
   And as I looked upon his evil face
   Suddenly like a flame there flashed across me,
   There is the barrier which Guido spoke of:
   You said there lay a barrier between us,
   What barrier but he?—
   I hardly know
   What happened, but a steaming mist of blood
   Rose up between us two.

GUIDO

   Oh, horrible!

DUCHESS

   And then he groaned,
   And then he groaned no more!  I only heard
   The dripping of the blood upon the floor.

GUIDO

   Enough, enough.

DUCHESS

   Will you not kiss me now?
   Do you remember saying that women’s love
   Turns men to angels? well, the love of man
   Turns women into martyrs; for its sake
   We do or suffer anything.

GUIDO

   O God!

DUCHESS

   Will you not speak?

GUIDO

   I cannot speak at all.

DUCHESS

   Let as not talk of this!  Let us go hence:
   Is not the barrier broken down between us?
   What would you more?  Come, it is almost morning.

                                             [_Puts her hand on_ GUIDO’S.]

GUIDO [_breaking from her_]

   O damned saint!  O angel fresh from Hell!
   What bloody devil tempted thee to this!
   That thou hast killed thy husband, that is nothing—
   Hell was already gaping for his soul—
   But thou hast murdered Love, and in its place
   Hast set a horrible and bloodstained thing,
   Whose very breath breeds pestilence and plague,
   And strangles Love.

DUCHESS [_in amazed wonder_]

   I did it all for you.
   I would not have you do it, had you willed it,
   For I would keep you without blot or stain,
   A thing unblemished, unassailed, untarnished.
   Men do not know what women do for love.
   Have I not wrecked my soul for your dear sake,
   Here and hereafter?

GUIDO

   No, do not touch me,
   Between us lies a thin red stream of blood;
   I dare not look across it: when you stabbed him
   You stabbed Love with a sharp knife to the heart.
   We cannot meet again.

DUCHESS [_wringing her hands_]

   For you!  For you!
   I did it all for you: have you forgotten?
   You said there was a barrier between us;
   That barrier lies now i’ the upper chamber
   Upset, overthrown, beaten, and battered down,
   And will not part us ever.

GUIDO

   No, you mistook:
   Sin was the barrier, you have raised it up;
   Crime was the barrier, you have set it there.
   The barrier was murder, and your hand
   Has builded it so high it shuts out heaven,
   It shuts out God.

DUCHESS

   I did it all for you;
   You dare not leave me now: nay, Guido, listen.
   Get horses ready, we will fly to-night.
   The past is a bad dream, we will forget it:
   Before us lies the future: shall we not have
   Sweet days of love beneath our vines and laugh?—
   No, no, we will not laugh, but, when we weep,
   Well, we will weep together; I will serve you;
   I will be very meek and very gentle:
   You do not know me.

GUIDO

   Nay, I know you now;
   Get hence, I say, out of my sight.

DUCHESS [_pacing up and down_]

   O God,
   How I have loved this man!

GUIDO

   You never loved me.
   Had it been so, Love would have stayed your hand.
   How could we sit together at Love’s table?
   You have poured poison in the sacred wine,
   And Murder dips his fingers in the sop.

DUCHESS [_throws herself on her knees_]

   Then slay me now!  I have spilt blood to-night,
   You shall spill more, so we go hand in hand
   To heaven or to hell.  Draw your sword, Guido.
   Quick, let your soul go chambering in my heart,
   It will but find its master’s image there.
   Nay, if you will not slay me with your sword,
   Bid me to fall upon this reeking knife,
   And I will do it.

GUIDO [_wresting knife from her_]

   Give it to me, I say.
   O God, your very hands are wet with blood!
   This place is Hell, I cannot tarry here.
   I pray you let me see your face no more.

DUCHESS

   Better for me I had not seen your face.

                  [GUIDO _recoils_: _she seizes his hands as she kneels_.]

   Nay, Guido, listen for a while:
   Until you came to Padua I lived
   Wretched indeed, but with no murderous thought,
   Very submissive to a cruel Lord,
   Very obedient to unjust commands,
   As pure I think as any gentle girl
   Who now would turn in horror from my hands—

                                                            [_Stands up_.]

   You came: ah!  Guido, the first kindly words
   I ever heard since I had come from France
   Were from your lips: well, well, that is no matter.
   You came, and in the passion of your eyes
   I read love’s meaning; everything you said
   Touched my dumb soul to music, so I loved you.
   And yet I did not tell you of my love.
   ’Twas you who sought me out, knelt at my feet
   As I kneel now at yours, and with sweet vows,

                                                               [_Kneels_.]

   Whose music seems to linger in my ears,
   Swore that you loved me, and I trusted you.
   I think there are many women in the world
   Who would have tempted you to kill the man.
   I did not.
   Yet I know that had I done so,
   I had not been thus humbled in the dust,

                                                            [_Stands up_.]

   But you had loved me very faithfully.

                                 [_After a pause approaches him timidly_.]

   I do not think you understand me, Guido:
   It was for your sake that I wrought this deed
   Whose horror now chills my young blood to ice,
   For your sake only.  [_Stretching out her arm_.]
   Will you not speak to me?
   Love me a little: in my girlish life
   I have been starved for love, and kindliness
   Has passed me by.

GUIDO

   I dare not look at you:
   You come to me with too pronounced a favour;
   Get to your tirewomen.

DUCHESS

   Ay, there it is!
   There speaks the man! yet had you come to me
   With any heavy sin upon your soul,
   Some murder done for hire, not for love,
   Why, I had sat and watched at your bedside
   All through the night-time, lest Remorse might come
   And pour his poisons in your ear, and so
   Keep you from sleeping!  Sure it is the guilty,
   Who, being very wretched, need love most.

GUIDO

   There is no love where there is any guilt.

DUCHESS

   No love where there is any guilt!  O God,
   How differently do we love from men!
   There is many a woman here in Padua,
   Some workman’s wife, or ruder artisan’s,
   Whose husband spends the wages of the week
   In a coarse revel, or a tavern brawl,
   And reeling home late on the Saturday night,
   Finds his wife sitting by a fireless hearth,
   Trying to hush the child who cries for hunger,
   And then sets to and beats his wife because
   The child is hungry, and the fire black.
   Yet the wife loves him! and will rise next day
   With some red bruise across a careworn face,
   And sweep the house, and do the common service,
   And try and smile, and only be too glad
   If he does not beat her a second time
   Before her child!—that is how women love.

                                        [_A pause_: GUIDO _says nothing_.]

   I think you will not drive me from your side.
   Where have I got to go if you reject me?—
   You for whose sake this hand has murdered life,
   You for whose sake my soul has wrecked itself
   Beyond all hope of pardon.

GUIDO

   Get thee gone:
   The dead man is a ghost, and our love too,
   Flits like a ghost about its desolate tomb,
   And wanders through this charnel house, and weeps
   That when you slew your lord you slew it also.
   Do you not see?

DUCHESS

   I see when men love women
   They give them but a little of their lives,
   But women when they love give everything;
   I see that, Guido, now.

GUIDO

   Away, away,
   And come not back till you have waked your dead.

DUCHESS

   I would to God that I could wake the dead,
   Put vision in the glazéd eves, and give
   The tongue its natural utterance, and bid
   The heart to beat again: that cannot be:
   For what is done, is done: and what is dead
   Is dead for ever: the fire cannot warm him:
   The winter cannot hurt him with its snows;
   Something has gone from him; if you call him now,
   He will not answer; if you mock him now,
   He will not laugh; and if you stab him now
   He will not bleed.
   I would that I could wake him!
   O God, put back the sun a little space,
   And from the roll of time blot out to-night,
   And bid it not have been!  Put back the sun,
   And make me what I was an hour ago!
   No, no, time will not stop for anything,
   Nor the sun stay its courses, though Repentance
   Calling it back grow hoarse; but you, my love,
   Have you no word of pity even for me?
   O Guido, Guido, will you not kiss me once?
   Drive me not to some desperate resolve:
   Women grow mad when they are treated thus:
   Will you not kiss me once?

GUIDO [_holding up knife_]

   I will not kiss you
   Until the blood grows dry upon this knife,
   [_Wildly_]  Back to your dead!

DUCHESS [_going up the stairs_]

   Why, then I will be gone! and may you find
   More mercy than you showed to me to-night!

GUIDO

   Let me find mercy when I go at night
   And do foul murder.

DUCHESS [_coming down a few steps_.]

   Murder did you say?
   Murder is hungry, and still cries for more,
   And Death, his brother, is not satisfied,
   But walks the house, and will not go away,
   Unless he has a comrade!  Tarry, Death,
   For I will give thee a most faithful lackey
   To travel with thee!  Murder, call no more,
   For thou shalt eat thy fill.
   There is a storm
   Will break upon this house before the morning,
   So horrible, that the white moon already
   Turns grey and sick with terror, the low wind
   Goes moaning round the house, and the high stars
   Run madly through the vaulted firmament,
   As though the night wept tears of liquid fire
   For what the day shall look upon.  Oh, weep,
   Thou lamentable heaven!  Weep thy fill!
   Though sorrow like a cataract drench the fields,
   And make the earth one bitter lake of tears,
   It would not be enough.  [_A peal of thunder_.]
   Do you not hear,
   There is artillery in the Heaven to-night.
   Vengeance is wakened up, and has unloosed
   His dogs upon the world, and in this matter
   Which lies between us two, let him who draws
   The thunder on his head beware the ruin
   Which the forked flame brings after.

         [_A flash of lightning followed by a peal of thunder_.]

GUIDO

   Away! away!

[_Exit the_ DUCHESS, _who as she lifts the crimson curtain looks back for
a moment at_ GUIDO, _but he makes no sign_.  _More thunder_.]

   Now is life fallen in ashes at my feet
   And noble love self-slain; and in its place
   Crept murder with its silent bloody feet.
   And she who wrought it—Oh! and yet she loved me,
   And for my sake did do this dreadful thing.
   I have been cruel to her: Beatrice!
   Beatrice, I say, come back.

  [_Begins to ascend staircase_, _when the noise of Soldiers is heard_.]

   Ah! what is that?
   Torches ablaze, and noise of hurrying feet.
   Pray God they have not seized her.

                                                   [_Noise grows louder_.]

   Beatrice!
   There is yet time to escape.  Come down, come out!

                 [_The voice of the_ DUCHESS _outside_.]

   This way went he, the man who slew my lord.

[_Down the staircase comes hurrying a confused body of Soldiers_; GUIDO
_is not seen at first_, _till the_ DUCHESS _surrounded by Servants
carrying torches appears at the top of the staircase_, _and points to_
GUIDO, _who is seized at once_, _one of the Soldiers dragging the knife
from his hand and showing it to the Captain of the Guard in sight of the
audience_.  _Tableau_.]

ACT IV


                                  SCENE

_The Court of Justice_: _the walls are hung with stamped grey velvet_:
_above the hangings the wall is red_, _and gilt symbolical figures bear
up the roof_, _which is made of red beams with grey soffits and
moulding_: _a canopy of white satin flowered with gold is set for the
Duchess_: _below it a long bench with red cloth for the Judges_: _below
that a table for the clerks of the court.  Two soldiers stand on each
side of the canopy_, _and two soldiers guard the door_; _the citizens
have some of them collected in the Court_; _others are coming in greeting
one another_; _two tipstaffs in violet keep order with long white wands_.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Good morrow, neighbour Anthony.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Good morrow, neighbour Dominick.

FIRST CITIZEN

   This is a strange day for Padua, is it not?—the Duke being dead.

SECOND CITIZEN

   I tell you, neighbour Dominick, I have not known such a day since the
   last Duke died.

FIRST CITIZEN

   They will try him first, and sentence him afterwards, will they not,
   neighbour Anthony?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Nay, for he might ’scape his punishment then; but they will condemn
   him first so that he gets his deserts, and give him trial afterwards
   so that no injustice is done.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Well, well, it will go hard with him I doubt not.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Surely it is a grievous thing to shed a Duke’s blood.

THIRD CITIZEN

   They say a Duke has blue blood.

SECOND CITIZEN

   I think our Duke’s blood was black like his soul.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Have a watch, neighbour Anthony, the officer is looking at thee.

SECOND CITIZEN

   I care not if he does but look at me; he cannot whip me with the
   lashes of his eye.

THIRD CITIZEN

   What think you of this young man who stuck the knife into the Duke?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Why, that he is a well-behaved, and a well-meaning, and a
   well-favoured lad, and yet wicked in that he killed the Duke.

THIRD CITIZEN

   ’Twas the first time he did it: may be the law will not be hard on
   him, as he did not do it before.

SECOND CITIZEN

   True.

TIPSTAFF

   Silence, knave.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Am I thy looking-glass, Master Tipstaff, that thou callest me knave?

FIRST CITIZEN

   Here be one of the household coming.  Well, Dame Lucy, thou art of the
   Court, how does thy poor mistress the Duchess, with her sweet face?

MISTRESS LUCY

   O well-a-day!  O miserable day!  O day!  O misery!  Why it is just
   nineteen years last June, at Michaelmas, since I was married to my
   husband, and it is August now, and here is the Duke murdered; there is
   a coincidence for you!

SECOND CITIZEN

   Why, if it is a coincidence, they may not kill the young man: there is
   no law against coincidences.

FIRST CITIZEN

   But how does the Duchess?

MISTRESS LUCY

   Well well, I knew some harm would happen to the house: six weeks ago
   the cakes were all burned on one side, and last Saint Martin even as
   ever was, there flew into the candle a big moth that had wings, and
   a’most scared me.

FIRST CITIZEN

   But come to the Duchess, good gossip: what of her?

MISTRESS LUCY

   Marry, it is time you should ask after her, poor lady; she is
   distraught almost.  Why, she has not slept, but paced the chamber all
   night long.  I prayed her to have a posset, or some aqua-vitæ, and to
   get to bed and sleep a little for her health’s sake, but she answered
   me she was afraid she might dream.  That was a strange answer, was it
   not?

SECOND CITIZEN

   These great folk have not much sense, so Providence makes it up to
   them in fine clothes.

MISTRESS LUCY

   Well, well, God keep murder from us, I say, as long as we are alive.

                                     [_Enter_ LORD MORANZONE _hurriedly_.]

MORANZONE

   Is the Duke dead?

SECOND CITIZEN

   He has a knife in his heart, which they say is not healthy for any
   man.

MORANZONE

   Who is accused of having killed him?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Why, the prisoner, sir.

MORANZONE

   But who is the prisoner?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Why, he that is accused of the Duke’s murder.

MORANZONE

   I mean, what is his name?

SECOND CITIZEN

   Faith, the same which his godfathers gave him: what else should it be?

TIPSTAFF

   Guido Ferranti is his name, my lord.

MORANZONE

   I almost knew thine answer ere you gave it.

                                                                [_Aside_.]

   Yet it is strange he should have killed the Duke,
   Seeing he left me in such different mood.
   It is most likely when he saw the man,
   This devil who had sold his father’s life,
   That passion from their seat within his heart
   Thrust all his boyish theories of love,
   And in their place set vengeance; yet I marvel
   That he escaped not.

                                           [_Turning again to the crowd_.]

   How was he taken?  Tell me.

THIRD CITIZEN

   Marry, sir, he was taken by the heels.

MORANZONE

   But who seized him?

THIRD CITIZEN

   Why, those that did lay hold of him.

MORANZONE

   How was the alarm given?

THIRD CITIZEN

   That I cannot tell you, sir.

MISTRESS LUCY

   It was the Duchess herself who pointed him out.

MORANZONE [_aside_]

   The Duchess!  There is something strange in this.

MISTRESS LUCY

   Ay! And the dagger was in his hand—the Duchess’s own dagger.

MORANZONE

   What did you say?

MISTRESS LUCY

   Why, marry, that it was with the Duchess’s dagger that the Duke was
   killed.

MORANZONE [_aside_]

   There is some mystery about this: I cannot understand it.

SECOND CITIZEN

   They be very long a-coming,

FIRST CITIZEN

   I warrant they will come soon enough for the prisoner.

TIPSTAFF

   Silence in the Court!

FIRST CITIZEN

   Thou dost break silence in bidding us keep it, Master Tipstaff.

                        [_Enter the_ LORD JUSTICE _and the other Judges_.]

SECOND CITIZEN

   Who is he in scarlet?  Is he the headsman?

THIRD CITIZEN

   Nay, he is the Lord Justice.

                                                [_Enter_ GUIDO _guarded_.]

SECOND CITIZEN

   There be the prisoner surely.

THIRD CITIZEN

   He looks honest.

FIRST CITIZEN

   That be his villany: knaves nowadays do look so honest that honest
   folk are forced to look like knaves so as to be different.

                [_Enter the Headman_, _who takes his stand behind_ GUIDO.]

SECOND CITIZEN

   Yon be the headsman then!  O Lord!  Is the axe sharp, think you?

FIRST CITIZEN

   Ay! sharper than thy wits are; but the edge is not towards him, mark
   you.

SECOND CITIZEN [_scratching his neck_]

   I’ faith, I like it not so near.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Tut, thou need’st not be afraid; they never cut the heads of common
   folk: they do but hang us.

                                                     [_Trumpets outside_.]

THIRD CITIZEN

   What are the trumpets for?  Is the trial over?

FIRST CITIZEN

   Nay, ’tis for the Duchess.

[_Enter the_ DUCHESS _in black velvet_; _her train of flowered black
velvet is carried by two pages in violet_; _with her is the_ CARDINAL _in
scarlet_, _and the gentlemen of the Court in black_; _she takes her seat
on the throne above the Judges_, _who rise and take their caps off as she
enters_; _the_ CARDINAL _sits next to her a little lower_; _the Courtiers
group themselves about the throne_.]

SECOND CITIZEN

   O poor lady, how pale she is!  Will she sit there?

FIRST CITIZEN

   Ay! she is in the Duke’s place now.

SECOND CITIZEN

   That is a good thing for Padua; the Duchess is a very kind and
   merciful Duchess; why, she cured my child of the ague once.

THIRD CITIZEN

   Ay, and has given us bread: do not forget the bread.

A SOLDIER

   Stand back, good people.

SECOND CITIZEN

   If we be good, why should we stand back?

TIPSTAFF

   Silence in the Court!

LORD JUSTICE

   May it please your Grace,
   Is it your pleasure we proceed to trial
   Of the Duke’s murder?  [DUCHESS _bows_.]
   Set the prisoner forth.
   What is thy name?

GUIDO

   It matters not, my lord.

LORD JUSTICE

   Guido Ferranti is thy name in Padua.

GUIDO

   A man may die as well under that name as any other.

LORD JUSTICE

   Thou art not ignorant
   What dreadful charge men lay against thee here,
   Namely, the treacherous murder of thy Lord,
   Simone Gesso, Duke of Padua;
   What dost thou say in answer?

GUIDO

   I say nothing.

LORD JUSTICE [_rising_]

   Guido Ferranti—

MORANZONE [_stepping from the crowd_]

   Tarry, my Lord Justice.

LORD JUSTICE

   Who art thou that bid’st justice tarry, sir?

MORANZONE

   So be it justice it can go its way;
   But if it be not justice—

LORD JUSTICE

   Who is this?

COUNT BARDI

   A very noble gentleman, and well known
   To the late Duke.

LORD JUSTICE

   Sir, thou art come in time
   To see the murder of the Duke avenged.
   There stands the man who did this heinous thing.

MORANZONE

   My lord,
   I ask again what proof have ye?

LORD JUSTICE [_holding up the dagger_]

   This dagger,
   Which from his blood-stained hands, itself all blood,
   Last night the soldiers seized: what further proof
   Need we indeed?

MORANZONE [_takes the danger and approaches the_ DUCHESS]

   Saw I not such a dagger
   Hang from your Grace’s girdle yesterday?

             [_The_ DUCHESS _shudders and makes no answer_.]

   Ah! my Lord Justice, may I speak a moment
   With this young man, who in such peril stands?

LORD JUSTICE

   Ay, willingly, my lord, and may you turn him
   To make a full avowal of his guilt.

[LORD MORANZONE _goes over to_ GUIDO, _who stands R. and clutches him by
the hand_.]

MORANZONE [_in a low voice_]

   She did it!  Nay, I saw it in her eyes.
   Boy, dost thou think I’ll let thy father’s son
   Be by this woman butchered to his death?
   Her husband sold your father, and the wife
   Would sell the son in turn.

GUIDO

   Lord Moranzone,
   I alone did this thing: be satisfied,
   My father is avenged.

LORD JUSTICE

   Doth he confess?

GUIDO

   My lord, I do confess
   That foul unnatural murder has been done.

FIRST CITIZEN

   Why, look at that: he has a pitiful heart, and does not like murder;
   they will let him go for that.

LORD JUSTICE

   Say you no more?

GUIDO

   My lord, I say this also,
   That to spill human blood is deadly sin.

SECOND CITIZEN

   Marry, he should tell that to the headsman: ’tis a good sentiment.

GUIDO

   Lastly, my lord, I do entreat the Court
   To give me leave to utter openly
   The dreadful secret of this mystery,
   And to point out the very guilty one
   Who with this dagger last night slew the Duke.

LORD JUSTICE

   Thou hast leave to speak.

DUCHESS [_rising_]

   I say he shall not speak:
   What need have we of further evidence?
   Was he not taken in the house at night
   In Guilt’s own bloody livery?

LORD JUSTICE [_showing her the statute_]

   Your Grace
   Can read the law.

DUCHESS [_waiving book aside_]

   Bethink you, my Lord Justice,
   Is it not very like that such a one
   May, in the presence of the people here,
   Utter some slanderous word against my Lord,
   Against the city, or the city’s honour,
   Perchance against myself.

LORD JUSTICE

   My liege, the law.

DUCHESS

   He shall not speak, but, with gags in his mouth,
   Shall climb the ladder to the bloody block.

LORD JUSTICE

   The law, my liege.

DUCHESS

   We are not bound by law,
   But with it we bind others.

MORANZONE

   My Lord Justice,
   Thou wilt not suffer this injustice here.

LORD JUSTICE

   The Court needs not thy voice, Lord Moranzone.
   Madam, it were a precedent most evil
   To wrest the law from its appointed course,
   For, though the cause be just, yet anarchy
   Might on this licence touch these golden scales
   And unjust causes unjust victories gain.

COUNT BARDI

   I do not think your Grace can stay the law.

DUCHESS

   Ay, it is well to preach and prate of law:
   Methinks, my haughty lords of Padua,
   If ye are hurt in pocket or estate,
   So much as makes your monstrous revenues
   Less by the value of one ferry toll,
   Ye do not wait the tedious law’s delay
   With such sweet patience as ye counsel me.

COUNT BARDI

   Madam, I think you wrong our nobles here.

DUCHESS

   I think I wrong them not.  Which of you all
   Finding a thief within his house at night,
   With some poor chattel thrust into his rags,
   Will stop and parley with him? do ye not
   Give him unto the officer and his hook
   To be dragged gaolwards straightway?
   And so now,
   Had ye been men, finding this fellow here,
   With my Lord’s life still hot upon his hands,
   Ye would have haled him out into the court,
   And struck his head off with an axe.

GUIDO

   O God!

DUCHESS

   Speak, my Lord Justice.

LORD JUSTICE

   Your Grace, it cannot be:
   The laws of Padua are most certain here:
   And by those laws the common murderer even
   May with his own lips plead, and make defence.

DUCHESS

   This is no common murderer, Lord Justice,
   But a great outlaw, and a most vile traitor,
   Taken in open arms against the state.
   For he who slays the man who rules a state
   Slays the state also, widows every wife,
   And makes each child an orphan, and no less
   Is to be held a public enemy,
   Than if he came with mighty ordonnance,
   And all the spears of Venice at his back,
   To beat and batter at our city gates—
   Nay, is more dangerous to our commonwealth,
   For walls and gates, bastions and forts, and things
   Whose common elements are wood and stone
   May be raised up, but who can raise again
   The ruined body of my murdered lord,
   And bid it live and laugh?

MAFFIO

   Now by Saint Paul
   I do not think that they will let him speak.

JEPPO VITELLOZZO

   There is much in this, listen.

DUCHESS

   Wherefore now,
   Throw ashes on the head of Padua,
   With sable banners hang each silent street,
   Let every man be clad in solemn black;
   But ere we turn to these sad rites of mourning
   Let us bethink us of the desperate hand
   Which wrought and brought this ruin on our state,
   And straightway pack him to that narrow house,
   Where no voice is, but with a little dust
   Death fills right up the lying mouths of men.

GUIDO

   Unhand me, knaves!  I tell thee, my Lord Justice,
   Thou mightst as well bid the untrammelled ocean,
   The winter whirlwind, or the Alpine storm,
   Not roar their will, as bid me hold my peace!
   Ay! though ye put your knives into my throat,
   Each grim and gaping wound shall find a tongue,
   And cry against you.

LORD JUSTICE

   Sir, this violence
   Avails you nothing; for save the tribunal
   Give thee a lawful right to open speech,
   Naught that thou sayest can be credited.

     [_The_ DUCHESS _smiles and_ GUIDO _falls back with a gesture of
                                despair_.]

   Madam, myself, and these wise Justices,
   Will with your Grace’s sanction now retire
   Into another chamber, to decide
   Upon this difficult matter of the law,
   And search the statutes and the precedents.

DUCHESS

   Go, my Lord Justice, search the statutes well,
   Nor let this brawling traitor have his way.

MORANZONE

   Go, my Lord Justice, search thy conscience well,
   Nor let a man be sent to death unheard.

                               [_Exit the_ LORD JUSTICE _and the Judges_.]

DUCHESS

   Silence, thou evil genius of my life!
   Thou com’st between us two a second time;
   This time, my lord, I think the turn is mine.

GUIDO

   I shall not die till I have uttered voice.

DUCHESS

   Thou shalt die silent, and thy secret with thee.

GUIDO

   Art thou that Beatrice, Duchess of Padua?

DUCHESS

   I am what thou hast made me; look at me well,
   I am thy handiwork.

MAFFIO

   See, is she not
   Like that white tigress which we saw at Venice,
   Sent by some Indian soldan to the Doge?

JEPPO

   Hush! she may hear thy chatter.

HEADSMAN

   My young fellow,
   I do not know why thou shouldst care to speak,
   Seeing my axe is close upon thy neck,
   And words of thine will never blunt its edge.
   But if thou art so bent upon it, why
   Thou mightest plead unto the Churchman yonder:
   The common people call him kindly here,
   Indeed I know he has a kindly soul.

GUIDO

   This man, whose trade is death, hath courtesies
   More than the others.

HEADSMAN

   Why, God love you, sir,
   I’ll do you your last service on this earth.

GUIDO

   My good Lord Cardinal, in a Christian land,
   With Lord Christ’s face of mercy looking down
   From the high seat of Judgment, shall a man
   Die unabsolved, unshrived?  And if not so,
   May I not tell this dreadful tale of sin,
   If any sin there be upon my soul?

DUCHESS

   Thou dost but waste thy time.

CARDINAL

   Alack, my son,
   I have no power with the secular arm.
   My task begins when justice has been done,
   To urge the wavering sinner to repent
   And to confess to Holy Church’s ear
   The dreadful secrets of a sinful mind.

DUCHESS

   Thou mayest speak to the confessional
   Until thy lips grow weary of their tale,
   But here thou shalt not speak.

GUIDO

   My reverend father,
   You bring me but cold comfort.

CARDINAL

   Nay, my son,
   For the great power of our mother Church,
   Ends not with this poor bubble of a world,
   Of which we are but dust, as Jerome saith,
   For if the sinner doth repentant die,
   Our prayers and holy masses much avail
   To bring the guilty soul from purgatory.

DUCHESS

   And when in purgatory thou seest my Lord
   With that red star of blood upon his heart,
   Tell him I sent thee hither.

GUIDO

   O dear God!

MORANZONE

   This is the woman, is it, whom you loved?

CARDINAL

   Your Grace is very cruel to this man.

DUCHESS

   No more than he was cruel to her Grace.

CARDINAL

   Yet mercy is the sovereign right of princes.

DUCHESS

   I got no mercy, and I give it not.
   He hath changed my heart into a heart of stone,
   He hath sown rank nettles in a goodly field,
   He hath poisoned the wells of pity in my breast,
   He hath withered up all kindness at the root;
   My life is as some famine murdered land,
   Whence all good things have perished utterly:
   I am what he hath made me.

                                                  [_The_ DUCHESS _weeps_.]

JEPPO

   Is it not strange
   That she should so have loved the wicked Duke?

MAFFIO

   It is most strange when women love their lords,
   And when they love them not it is most strange.

JEPPO

   What a philosopher thou art, Petrucci!

MAFFIO

   Ay!  I can bear the ills of other men,
   Which is philosophy.

DUCHESS

   They tarry long,
   These greybeards and their council; bid them come;
   Bid them come quickly, else I think my heart
   Will beat itself to bursting: not indeed,
   That I here care to live; God knows my life
   Is not so full of joy, yet, for all that,
   I would not die companionless, or go
   Lonely to Hell.
   Look, my Lord Cardinal,
   Canst thou not see across my forehead here,
   In scarlet letters writ, the word Revenge?
   Fetch me some water, I will wash it off:
   ’Twas branded there last night, but in the day-time
   I need not wear it, need I, my Lord Cardinal?
   Oh, how it sears and burns into my brain:
   Give me a knife; not that one, but another,
   And I will cut it out.

CARDINAL

   It is most natural
   To be incensed against the murderous hand
   That treacherously stabbed your sleeping lord.

DUCHESS

   I would, old Cardinal, I could burn that hand;
   But it will burn hereafter.

CARDINAL

   Nay, the Church
   Ordains us to forgive our enemies.

DUCHESS

   Forgiveness? what is that?  I never got it.
   They come at last: well, my Lord Justice, well.

                                               [_Enter the_ LORD JUSTICE.]

LORD JUSTICE

   Most gracious Lady, and our sovereign Liege,
   We have long pondered on the point at issue,
   And much considered of your Grace’s wisdom,
   And never wisdom spake from fairer lips—

DUCHESS

   Proceed, sir, without compliment.

LORD JUSTICE

   We find,
   As your own Grace did rightly signify,
   That any citizen, who by force or craft
   Conspires against the person of the Liege,
   Is _ipso facto_ outlaw, void of rights
   Such as pertain to other citizens,
   Is traitor, and a public enemy,
   Who may by any casual sword be slain
   Without the slayer’s danger; nay, if brought
   Into the presence of the tribunal,
   Must with dumb lips and silence reverent
   Listen unto his well-deserved doom,
   Nor has the privilege of open speech.

DUCHESS

   I thank thee, my Lord Justice, heartily;
   I like your law: and now I pray dispatch
   This public outlaw to his righteous doom;
   What is there more?

LORD JUSTICE

   Ay, there is more, your Grace.
   This man being alien born, not Paduan,
   Nor by allegiance bound unto the Duke,
   Save such as common nature doth lay down,
   Hath, though accused of treasons manifold,
   Whose slightest penalty is certain death,
   Yet still the right of public utterance
   Before the people and the open court;
   Nay, shall be much entreated by the Court,
   To make some formal pleading for his life,
   Lest his own city, righteously incensed,
   Should with an unjust trial tax our state,
   And wars spring up against the commonwealth:
   So merciful are the laws of Padua
   Unto the stranger living in her gates.

DUCHESS

   Being of my Lord’s household, is he stranger here?

LORD JUSTICE

   Ay, until seven years of service spent
   He cannot be a Paduan citizen.

GUIDO

   I thank thee, my Lord Justice, heartily;
   I like your law.

SECOND CITIZEN

   I like no law at all:
   Were there no law there’d be no law-breakers,
   So all men would be virtuous.

FIRST CITIZEN

   So they would;
   ’Tis a wise saying that, and brings you far.

TIPSTAFF

   Ay! to the gallows, knave.

DUCHESS

   Is this the law?

LORD JUSTICE

   It is the law most certainly, my liege.

DUCHESS

   Show me the book: ’tis written in blood-red.

JEPPO

   Look at the Duchess.

DUCHESS

   Thou accursed law,
   I would that I could tear thee from the state
   As easy as I tear thee from this book.

                                                   [_Tears out the page_.]

   Come here, Count Bardi: are you honourable?
   Get a horse ready for me at my house,
   For I must ride to Venice instantly.

BARDI

   To Venice, Madam?

DUCHESS

   Not a word of this,
   Go, go at once.  [_Exit_ COUNT BARDI.]
   A moment, my Lord Justice.
   If, as thou sayest it, this is the law—
   Nay, nay, I doubt not that thou sayest right,
   Though right be wrong in such a case as this—
   May I not by the virtue of mine office
   Adjourn this court until another day?

LORD JUSTICE

   Madam, you cannot stay a trial for blood.

DUCHESS

   I will not tarry then to hear this man
   Rail with rude tongue against our sacred person.
   Come, gentlemen.

LORD JUSTICE

   My liege,
   You cannot leave this court until the prisoner
   Be purged or guilty of this dread offence.

DUCHESS

   Cannot, Lord Justice?  By what right do you
   Set barriers in my path where I should go?
   Am I not Duchess here in Padua,
   And the state’s regent?

LORD JUSTICE

   For that reason, Madam,
   Being the fountain-head of life and death
   Whence, like a mighty river, justice flows,
   Without thy presence justice is dried up
   And fails of purpose: thou must tarry here.

DUCHESS

   What, wilt thou keep me here against my will?

LORD JUSTICE

   We pray thy will be not against the law.

DUCHESS

   What if I force my way out of the court?

LORD JUSTICE

   Thou canst not force the Court to give thee way.

DUCHESS

   I will not tarry.  [_Rises from her seat_.]

LORD JUSTICE

   Is the usher here?
   Let him stand forth.  [_Usher comes forward_.]
   Thou knowest thy business, sir.

[_The Usher closes the doors of the court_, _which are L._, _and when
the_ DUCHESS _and her retinue approach_, _kneels down_.]

USHER

   In all humility I beseech your Grace
   Turn not my duty to discourtesy,
   Nor make my unwelcome office an offence.

DUCHESS

   Is there no gentleman amongst you all
   To prick this prating fellow from our way?

MAFFIO [_drawing his sword_]

   Ay! that will I.

LORD JUSTICE

   Count Maffio, have a care,
   And you, sir.  [_To_ JEPPO.]
   The first man who draws his sword
   Upon the meanest officer of this Court,
   Dies before nightfall.

DUCHESS

   Sirs, put up your swords:
   It is most meet that I should hear this man.

                                                  [_Goes back to throne_.]

MORANZONE

   Now hast thou got thy enemy in thy hand.

LORD JUSTICE [_taking the time-glass up_]

   Guido Ferranti, while the crumbling sand
   Falls through this time-glass, thou hast leave to speak.
   This and no more.

GUIDO

   It is enough, my lord.

LORD JUSTICE

   Thou standest on the extreme verge of death;
   See that thou speakest nothing but the truth,
   Naught else will serve thee.

GUIDO

   If I speak it not,
   Then give my body to the headsman there.

LORD JUSTICE [_turns the time-glass_]

   Let there be silence while the prisoner speaks.

TIPSTAFF

   Silence in the Court there.

GUIDO

   My Lords Justices,
   And reverent judges of this worthy court,
   I hardly know where to begin my tale,
   So strangely dreadful is this history.
   First, let me tell you of what birth I am.
   I am the son of that good Duke Lorenzo
   Who was with damned treachery done to death
   By a most wicked villain, lately Duke
   Of this good town of Padua.

LORD JUSTICE

   Have a care,
   It will avail thee nought to mock this prince
   Who now lies in his coffin.

MAFFIO

   By Saint James,
   This is the Duke of Parma’s rightful heir.

JEPPO

   I always thought him noble.

GUIDO

   I confess
   That with the purport of a just revenge,
   A most just vengeance on a man of blood,
   I entered the Duke’s household, served his will,
   Sat at his board, drank of his wine, and was
   His intimate: so much I will confess,
   And this too, that I waited till he grew
   To give the fondest secrets of his life
   Into my keeping, till he fawned on me,
   And trusted me in every private matter
   Even as my noble father trusted him;
   That for this thing I waited.

                                                      [_To the Headsman_.]

   Thou man of blood!
   Turn not thine axe on me before the time:
   Who knows if it be time for me to die?
   Is there no other neck in court but mine?

LORD JUSTICE

   The sand within the time-glass flows apace.
   Come quickly to the murder of the Duke.

GUIDO

   I will be brief: Last night at twelve o’ the clock,
   By a strong rope I scaled the palace wall,
   With purport to revenge my father’s murder—
   Ay! with that purport I confess, my lord.
   This much I will acknowledge, and this also,
   That as with stealthy feet I climbed the stair
   Which led unto the chamber of the Duke,
   And reached my hand out for the scarlet cloth
   Which shook and shivered in the gusty door,
   Lo! the white moon that sailed in the great heaven
   Flooded with silver light the darkened room,
   Night lit her candles for me, and I saw
   The man I hated, cursing in his sleep;
   And thinking of a most dear father murdered,
   Sold to the scaffold, bartered to the block,
   I smote the treacherous villain to the heart
   With this same dagger, which by chance I found
   Within the chamber.

DUCHESS [_rising from her seat_]

   Oh!

GUIDO [_hurriedly_]

   I killed the Duke.
   Now, my Lord Justice, if I may crave a boon,
   Suffer me not to see another sun
   Light up the misery of this loathsome world.

LORD JUSTICE

   Thy boon is granted, thou shalt die to-night.
   Lead him away.  Come, Madam

[GUIDO _is led off_; _as he goes the_ DUCHESS _stretches out her arms and
rushes down the stage_.]

DUCHESS

   Guido!  Guido!

 
ACT V


                                  SCENE

_A dungeon in the public prison of Padua_; _Guido lies asleep on a
pallet_ (_L.C._); _a table with a goblet on it is set_ (_L.C._); _five
soldiers are drinking and playing dice in the corner on a stone table_;
_one of them has a lantern hung to his halbert_; _a torch is set in the
wall over Guido’s head_.  _Two grated windows behind_, _one on each side
of the door which is_ (_C._), _look out into the passage_; _the stage is
rather dark_.

FIRST SOLDIER [_throws dice_]

   Sixes again! good Pietro.

SECOND SOLDIER

   I’ faith, lieutenant, I will play with thee no more.  I will lose
   everything.

THIRD SOLDIER

   Except thy wits; thou art safe there!

SECOND SOLDIER

   Ay, ay, he cannot take them from me.

THIRD SOLDIER

   No; for thou hast no wits to give him.

THE SOLDIERS [_loudly_]

   Ha! ha! ha!

FIRST SOLDIER

   Silence!  You will wake the prisoner; he is asleep.

SECOND SOLDIER

   What matter?  He will get sleep enough when he is buried.  I warrant
   he’d be glad if we could wake him when he’s in the grave.

THIRD SOLDIER

   Nay! for when he wakes there it will be judgment day.

SECOND SOLDIER

   Ay, and he has done a grievous thing; for, look you, to murder one of
   us who are but flesh and blood is a sin, and to kill a Duke goes being
   near against the law.

FIRST SOLDIER

   Well, well, he was a wicked Duke.

SECOND SOLDIER

   And so he should not have touched him; if one meddles with wicked
   people, one is like to be tainted with their wickedness.

THIRD SOLDIER

   Ay, that is true.  How old is the prisoner?

SECOND SOLDIER

   Old enough to do wrong, and not old enough to be wise.

FIRST SOLDIER

   Why, then, he might be any age.

SECOND SOLDIER

   They say the Duchess wanted to pardon him.

FIRST SOLDIER

   Is that so?

SECOND SOLDIER

   Ay, and did much entreat the Lord Justice, but he would not.

FIRST SOLDIER

   I had thought, Pietro, that the Duchess was omnipotent.

SECOND SOLDIER

   True, she is well-favoured; I know none so comely.

THE SOLDIERS

   Ha! ha! ha!

FIRST SOLDIER

   I meant I had thought our Duchess could do anything.

SECOND SOLDIER

   Nay, for he is now given over to the Justices, and they will see that
   justice be done; they and stout Hugh the headsman; but when his head
   is off, why then the Duchess can pardon him if she likes; there is no
   law against that.

FIRST SOLDIER

   I do not think that stout Hugh, as you call him, will do the business
   for him after all.  This Guido is of gentle birth, and so by the law
   can drink poison first, if it so be his pleasure.

THIRD SOLDIER

   And if he does not drink it?

FIRST SOLDIER

   Why, then, they will kill him.

                                           [_Knocking comes at the door_.]

FIRST SOLDIER

   See who that is.

        [_Third Soldier goes over and looks through the wicket_.]

THIRD SOLDIER

   It is a woman, sir.

FIRST SOLDIER

   Is she pretty?

THIRD SOLDIER

   I can’t tell.  She is masked, lieutenant.

FIRST SOLDIER

   It is only very ugly or very beautiful women who ever hide their
   faces.  Let her in.

     [_Soldier opens the door_, _and the_ DUCHESS _masked and cloaked
                                enters_.]

DUCHESS [_to Third Soldier_]

   Are you the officer on guard?

FIRST SOLDIER [_coming forward_]

   I am, madam.

DUCHESS

   I must see the prisoner alone.

FIRST SOLDIER

   I am afraid that is impossible.  [_The_ DUCHESS _hands him a ring_,
   _he looks at and returns it to her with a bow and makes a sign to the
   Soldiers_.]  Stand without there.

                                                  [_Exeunt the Soldiers_.]

DUCHESS

   Officer, your men are somewhat rough.

FIRST SOLDIER

   They mean no harm.

DUCHESS

   I shall be going back in a few minutes.  As I pass through the
   corridor do not let them try and lift my mask.

FIRST SOLDIER

   You need not be afraid, madam.

DUCHESS

   I have a particular reason for wishing my face not to be seen.

FIRST SOLDIER

   Madam, with this ring you can go in and out as you please; it is the
   Duchess’s own ring.

DUCHESS

   Leave us.  [_The Soldier turns to go out_.]  A moment, sir.  For what
   hour is . . .

FIRST SOLDIER

   At twelve o’clock, madam, we have orders to lead him out; but I dare
   say he won’t wait for us; he’s more like to take a drink out of that
   poison yonder.  Men are afraid of the headsman.

DUCHESS

   Is that poison?

FIRST SOLDIER

   Ay, madam, and very sure poison too.

DUCHESS

   You may go, sir.

FIRST SOLDIER

   By Saint James, a pretty hand!  I wonder who she is.  Some woman who
   loved him, perhaps.

                                                                 [_Exit_.]

DUCHESS [_taking her mark off_]

   At last!
   He can escape now in this cloak and vizard,
   We are of a height almost: they will not know him;
   As for myself what matter?
   So that he does not curse me as he goes,
   I care but little: I wonder will he curse me.
   He has the right.  It is eleven now;
   They will not come till twelve.

                                               [_Goes over to the table_.]

   So this is poison.
   Is it not strange that in this liquor here
   There lies the key to all philosophies?

                                                     [_Takes the cup up_.]

   It smells of poppies.  I remember well
   That, when I was a child in Sicily,
   I took the scarlet poppies from the corn,
   And made a little wreath, and my grave uncle,
   Don John of Naples, laughed: I did not know
   That they had power to stay the springs of life,
   To make the pulse cease beating, and to chill
   The blood in its own vessels, till men come
   And with a hook hale the poor body out,
   And throw it in a ditch: the body, ay,—
   What of the soul? that goes to heaven or hell.
   Where will mine go?

      [_Takes the torch from the wall_, _and goes over to the bed_.]

   How peacefully here he sleeps,
   Like a young schoolboy tired out with play:
   I would that I could sleep so peacefully,
   But I have dreams.  [_Bending over him_.]
   Poor boy: what if I kissed him?
   No, no, my lips would burn him like a fire.
   He has had enough of Love.  Still that white neck
   Will ’scape the headsman: I have seen to that:
   He will get hence from Padua to-night,
   And that is well.  You are very wise, Lord Justices,
   And yet you are not half so wise as I am,
   And that is well.
   O God! how I have loved you,
   And what a bloody flower did Love bear!

                                              [_Comes back to the table_.]

   What if I drank these juices, and so ceased?
   Were it not better than to wait till Death
   Come to my bed with all his serving men,
   Remorse, disease, old age, and misery?
   I wonder does one suffer much: I think
   That I am very young to die like this,
   But so it must be.  Why, why should I die?
   He will escape to-night, and so his blood
   Will not be on my head.  No, I must die;
   I have been guilty, therefore I must die;
   He loves me not, and therefore I must die:
   I would die happier if he would kiss me,
   But he will not do that.  I did not know him.
   I thought he meant to sell me to the Judge;
   That is not strange; we women never know
   Our lovers till they leave us.

                                                  [_Bell begins to toll_.]

   Thou vile bell,
   That like a bloodhound from thy brazen throat
   Call’st for this man’s life, cease! thou shalt not get it.
   He stirs—I must be quick:  [_Takes up cup_.]
   O Love, Love, Love,
   I did not think that I would pledge thee thus!

[_Drinks poison_, _and sets the cup down on the table behind her_: _the
noise wakens_ GUIDO, _who starts up_, _and does not see what she has
done_.  _There is silence for a minute_, _each looking at the other_.]

   I do not come to ask your pardon now,
   Seeing I know I stand beyond all pardon;
   Enough of that: I have already, sir,
   Confessed my sin to the Lords Justices;
   They would not listen to me: and some said
   I did invent a tale to save your life;
   You have trafficked with me; others said
   That women played with pity as with men;
   Others that grief for my slain Lord and husband
   Had robbed me of my wits: they would not hear me,
   And, when I sware it on the holy book,
   They bade the doctor cure me.  They are ten,
   Ten against one, and they possess your life.
   They call me Duchess here in Padua.
   I do not know, sir; if I be the Duchess,
   I wrote your pardon, and they would not take it;
   They call it treason, say I taught them that;
   Maybe I did.  Within an hour, Guido,
   They will be here, and drag you from the cell,
   And bind your hands behind your back, and bid you
   Kneel at the block: I am before them there;
   Here is the signet ring of Padua,
   ’Twill bring you safely through the men on guard;
   There is my cloak and vizard; they have orders
   Not to be curious: when you pass the gate
   Turn to the left, and at the second bridge
   You will find horses waiting: by to-morrow
   You will be at Venice, safe.  [_A pause_.]
   Do you not speak?
   Will you not even curse me ere you go?—
   You have the right.  [_A pause_.]
   You do not understand
   There lies between you and the headsman’s axe
   Hardly so much sand in the hour-glass
   As a child’s palm could carry: here is the ring:
   I have washed my hand: there is no blood upon it:
   You need not fear.  Will you not take the ring?

GUIDO [_takes ring and kisses it_]

   Ay! gladly, Madam.

DUCHESS

   And leave Padua.

GUIDO

   Leave Padua.

DUCHESS

   But it must be to-night.

GUIDO

   To-night it shall be.

DUCHESS

   Oh, thank God for that!

GUIDO

   So I can live; life never seemed so sweet
   As at this moment.

DUCHESS

   Do not tarry, Guido,
   There is my cloak: the horse is at the bridge,
   The second bridge below the ferry house:
   Why do you tarry?  Can your ears not hear
   This dreadful bell, whose every ringing stroke
   Robs one brief minute from your boyish life.
   Go quickly.

GUIDO

   Ay! he will come soon enough.

DUCHESS

   Who?

GUIDO [_calmly_]

   Why, the headsman.

DUCHESS

   No, no.

GUIDO

   Only he
   Can bring me out of Padua.

DUCHESS

   You dare not!
   You dare not burden my o’erburdened soul
   With two dead men!  I think one is enough.
   For when I stand before God, face to face,
   I would not have you, with a scarlet thread
   Around your white throat, coming up behind
   To say I did it.

GUIDO

   Madam, I wait.

DUCHESS

   No, no, you cannot: you do not understand,
   I have less power in Padua to-night
   Than any common woman; they will kill you.
   I saw the scaffold as I crossed the square,
   Already the low rabble throng about it
   With fearful jests, and horrid merriment,
   As though it were a morris-dancer’s platform,
   And not Death’s sable throne.  O Guido, Guido,
   You must escape!

GUIDO

   Madam, I tarry here.

DUCHESS

   Guido, you shall not: it would be a thing
   So terrible that the amazed stars
   Would fall from heaven, and the palsied moon
   Be in her sphere eclipsed, and the great sun
   Refuse to shine upon the unjust earth
   Which saw thee die.

GUIDO

   Be sure I shall not stir.

DUCHESS [_wringing her hands_]

   Is one sin not enough, but must it breed
   A second sin more horrible again
   Than was the one that bare it?  O God, God,
   Seal up sin’s teeming womb, and make it barren,
   I will not have more blood upon my hand
   Than I have now.

GUIDO [_seizing her hand_]

   What! am I fallen so low
   That I may not have leave to die for you?

DUCHESS [_tearing her hand away_]

   Die for me?—no, my life is a vile thing,
   Thrown to the miry highways of this world;
   You shall not die for me, you shall not, Guido;
   I am a guilty woman.

GUIDO

   Guilty?—let those
   Who know what a thing temptation is,
   Let those who have not walked as we have done,
   In the red fire of passion, those whose lives
   Are dull and colourless, in a word let those,
   If any such there be, who have not loved,
   Cast stones against you.  As for me—

DUCHESS

   Alas!

GUIDO [_falling at her feet_]

   You are my lady, and you are my love!
   O hair of gold, O crimson lips, O face
   Made for the luring and the love of man!
   Incarnate image of pure loveliness!
   Worshipping thee I do forget the past,
   Worshipping thee my soul comes close to thine,
   Worshipping thee I seem to be a god,
   And though they give my body to the block,
   Yet is my love eternal!

    [DUCHESS _puts her hands over her face_: GUIDO _draws them down_.]

   Sweet, lift up
   The trailing curtains that overhang your eyes
   That I may look into those eyes, and tell you
   I love you, never more than now when Death
   Thrusts his cold lips between us: Beatrice,
   I love you: have you no word left to say?
   Oh, I can bear the executioner,
   But not this silence: will you not say you love me?
   Speak but that word and Death shall lose his sting,
   But speak it not, and fifty thousand deaths
   Are, in comparison, mercy.  Oh, you are cruel,
   And do not love me.

DUCHESS

   Alas!  I have no right
   For I have stained the innocent hands of love
   With spilt-out blood: there is blood on the ground;
   I set it there.

GUIDO

   Sweet, it was not yourself,
   It was some devil tempted you.

DUCHESS [_rising suddenly_]

   No, no,
   We are each our own devil, and we make
   This world our hell.

GUIDO

   Then let high Paradise
   Fall into Tartarus! for I shall make
   This world my heaven for a little space.
   The sin was mine, if any sin there was.
   ’Twas I who nurtured murder in my heart,
   Sweetened my meats, seasoned my wine with it,
   And in my fancy slew the accursed Duke
   A hundred times a day.  Why, had this man
   Died half so often as I wished him to,
   Death had been stalking ever through the house,
   And murder had not slept.
   But you, fond heart,
   Whose little eyes grew tender over a whipt hound,
   You whom the little children laughed to see
   Because you brought the sunlight where you passed,
   You the white angel of God’s purity,
   This which men call your sin, what was it?

DUCHESS

   Ay!
   What was it?  There are times it seems a dream,
   An evil dream sent by an evil god,
   And then I see the dead face in the coffin
   And know it is no dream, but that my hand
   Is red with blood, and that my desperate soul
   Striving to find some haven for its love
   From the wild tempest of this raging world,
   Has wrecked its bark upon the rocks of sin.
   What was it, said you?—murder merely?  Nothing
   But murder, horrible murder.

GUIDO

   Nay, nay, nay,
   ’Twas but the passion-flower of your love
   That in one moment leapt to terrible life,
   And in one moment bare this gory fruit,
   Which I had plucked in thought a thousand times.
   My soul was murderous, but my hand refused;
   Your hand wrought murder, but your soul was pure.
   And so I love you, Beatrice, and let him
   Who has no mercy for your stricken head,
   Lack mercy up in heaven!  Kiss me, sweet.

                                                    [_Tries to kiss her_.]

DUCHESS

   No, no, your lips are pure, and mine are soiled,
   For Guilt has been my paramour, and Sin
   Lain in my bed: O Guido, if you love me
   Get hence, for every moment is a worm
   Which gnaws your life away: nay, sweet, get hence,
   And if in after time you think of me,
   Think of me as of one who loved you more
   Than anything on earth; think of me, Guido,
   As of a woman merely, one who tried
   To make her life a sacrifice to love,
   And slew love in the trial: Oh, what is that?
   The bell has stopped from ringing, and I hear
   The feet of armed men upon the stair.

GUIDO [_aside_]

   That is the signal for the guard to come.

DUCHESS

   Why has the bell stopped ringing?

GUIDO

   If you must know,
   That stops my life on this side of the grave,
   But on the other we shall meet again.

DUCHESS

   No, no, ’tis not too late: you must get hence;
   The horse is by the bridge, there is still time.
   Away, away, you must not tarry here!

                                     [_Noise of Soldiers in the passage_.]

A VOICE OUTSIDE

   Room for the Lord Justice of Padua!

[_The_ LORD JUSTICE _is seen through the grated window passing down the
corridor preceded by men bearing torches_.]

DUCHESS

   It is too late.

A VOICE OUTSIDE

   Room for the headsman.

DUCHESS [_sinks down_]

   Oh!

[_The Headsman with his axe on his shoulder is seen passing the
corridor_, _followed by Monks bearing candles_.]

GUIDO

   Farewell, dear love, for I must drink this poison.
   I do not fear the headsman, but I would die
   Not on the lonely scaffold.
   But here,
   Here in thine arms, kissing thy mouth: farewell!

                            [_Goes to the table and takes the goblet up_.]

   What, art thou empty?

                                              [_Throws it to the ground_.]

   O thou churlish gaoler,
   Even of poisons niggard!

DUCHESS [_faintly_]

   Blame him not.

GUIDO

   O God! you have not drunk it, Beatrice?
   Tell me you have not?

DUCHESS

   Were I to deny it,
   There is a fire eating at my heart
   Which would find utterance.

GUIDO

   O treacherous love,
   Why have you not left a drop for me?

DUCHESS

   No, no, it held but death enough for one.

GUIDO

   Is there no poison still upon your lips,
   That I may draw it from them?

DUCHESS

   Why should you die?
   You have not spilt blood, and so need not die:
   I have spilt blood, and therefore I must die.
   Was it not said blood should be spilt for blood?
   Who said that?  I forget.

GUIDO

   Tarry for me,
   Our souls will go together.

DUCHESS

   Nay, you must live.
   There are many other women in the world
   Who will love you, and not murder for your sake.

GUIDO

   I love you only.

DUCHESS

   You need not die for that.

GUIDO

   Ah, if we die together, love, why then
   Can we not lie together in one grave?

DUCHESS

   A grave is but a narrow wedding-bed.

GUIDO

   It is enough for us

DUCHESS

   And they will strew it
   With a stark winding-sheet, and bitter herbs:
   I think there are no roses in the grave,
   Or if there are, they all are withered now
   Since my Lord went there.

GUIDO

   Ah! dear Beatrice,
   Your lips are roses that death cannot wither.

DUCHESS

   Nay, if we lie together, will not my lips
   Fall into dust, and your enamoured eyes
   Shrivel to sightless sockets, and the worms,
   Which are our groomsmen, eat away your heart?

GUIDO

   I do not care: Death has no power on love.
   And so by Love’s immortal sovereignty
   I will die with you.

DUCHESS

   But the grave is black,
   And the pit black, so I must go before
   To light the candles for your coming hither.
   No, no, I will not die, I will not die.
   Love, you are strong, and young, and very brave;
   Stand between me and the angel of death,
   And wrestle with him for me.

    [_Thrusts_ GUIDO _in front of her with his back to the audience_.]

   I will kiss you,
   When you have thrown him.  Oh, have you no cordial,
   To stay the workings of this poison in me?
   Are there no rivers left in Italy
   That you will not fetch me one cup of water
   To quench this fire?

GUIDO

   O God!

DUCHESS

   You did not tell me
   There was a drought in Italy, and no water:
   Nothing but fire.

GUIDO

   O Love!

DUCHESS

   Send for a leech,
   Not him who stanched my husband, but another
   We have no time: send for a leech, I say:
   There is an antidote against each poison,
   And he will sell it if we give him money.
   Tell him that I will give him Padua,
   For one short hour of life: I will not die.
   Oh, I am sick to death; no, do not touch me,
   This poison gnaws my heart: I did not know
   It was such pain to die: I thought that life
   Had taken all the agonies to itself;
   It seems it is not so.

GUIDO

   O damnéd stars
   Quench your vile cresset-lights in tears, and bid
   The moon, your mistress, shine no more to-night.

DUCHESS

   Guido, why are we here?  I think this room
   Is poorly furnished for a marriage chamber.
   Let us get hence at once.  Where are the horses?
   We should be on our way to Venice now.
   How cold the night is!  We must ride faster.

                                     [_The Monks begin to chant outside_.]

   Music!  It should be merrier; but grief
   Is of the fashion now—I know not why.
   You must not weep: do we not love each other?—
   That is enough.  Death, what do you here?
   You were not bidden to this table, sir;
   Away, we have no need of you: I tell you
   It was in wine I pledged you, not in poison.
   They lied who told you that I drank your poison.
   It was spilt upon the ground, like my Lord’s blood;
   You came too late.

GUIDO

   Sweet, there is nothing there:
   These things are only unreal shadows.

DUCHESS

   Death,
   Why do you tarry, get to the upper chamber;
   The cold meats of my husband’s funeral feast
   Are set for you; this is a wedding feast.
   You are out of place, sir; and, besides, ’tis summer.
   We do not need these heavy fires now,
   You scorch us.
   Oh, I am burned up,
   Can you do nothing?  Water, give me water,
   Or else more poison.  No: I feel no pain—
   Is it not curious I should feel no pain?—
   And Death has gone away, I am glad of that.
   I thought he meant to part us.  Tell me, Guido,
   Are you not sorry that you ever saw me?

GUIDO

   I swear I would not have lived otherwise.
   Why, in this dull and common world of ours
   Men have died looking for such moments as this
   And have not found them.

DUCHESS

   Then you are not sorry?
   How strange that seems.

GUIDO

   What, Beatrice, have I not
   Stood face to face with beauty?  That is enough
   For one man’s life.  Why, love, I could be merry;
   I have been often sadder at a feast,
   But who were sad at such a feast as this
   When Love and Death are both our cup-bearers?
   We love and die together.

DUCHESS

   Oh, I have been
   Guilty beyond all women, and indeed
   Beyond all women punished.  Do you think—
   No, that could not be—Oh, do you think that love
   Can wipe the bloody stain from off my hands,
   Pour balm into my wounds, heal up my hurts,
   And wash my scarlet sins as white as snow?—
   For I have sinned.

GUIDO

   They do not sin at all
   Who sin for love.

DUCHESS

   No, I have sinned, and yet
   Perchance my sin will be forgiven me.
   I have loved much

[_They kiss each other now for the first time in this Act_, _when
suddenly the_ DUCHESS _leaps up in the dreadful spasm of death_, _tears
in agony at her dress_, _and finally_, _with face twisted and distorted
with pain_, _falls back dead in a chair_.  GUIDO _seizing her dagger from
her belt_, _kills himself_; _and_, _as he falls across her knees_,
_clutches at the cloak which is on the back of the chair_, _and throws it
entirely over her_.  _There is a little pause_.  _Then down the passage
comes the tramp of Soldiers_; _the door is opened_, _and the_ LORD
JUSTICE, _the Headsman_, _and the Guard enter and see this figure
shrouded in black_, _and_ GUIDO _lying dead across her_.  _The_ LORD
JUSTICE _rushes forward and drags the cloak off the_ DUCHESS, _whose face
is now the marble image of peace_, _the sign of God’s forgiveness_.]


FIRST ACT


SCENE


Morning-room in Algernon's flat in Half-Moon Street.  The room is
luxuriously and artistically furnished.  The sound of a piano is heard in
the adjoining room.

[Lane is arranging afternoon tea on the table, and after the music has
ceased, Algernon enters.]

Algernon.  Did you hear what I was playing, Lane?

Lane.  I didn't think it polite to listen, sir.

Algernon.  I'm sorry for that, for your sake.  I don't play
accurately--any one can play accurately--but I play with wonderful
expression.  As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte.  I
keep science for Life.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the
cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Hands them on a salver.]

Algernon.  [Inspects them, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.]  Oh! . . .
by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when
Lord Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of
champagne are entered as having been consumed.

Lane.  Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.

Algernon.  Why is it that at a bachelor's establishment the servants
invariably drink the champagne?  I ask merely for information.

Lane.  I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir.  I have
often observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a
first-rate brand.

Algernon.  Good heavens!  Is marriage so demoralising as that?

Lane.  I believe it _is_ a very pleasant state, sir.  I have had very
little experience of it myself up to the present.  I have only been
married once.  That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between
myself and a young person.

Algernon.  [Languidly_._]  I don't know that I am much interested in your
family life, Lane.

Lane.  No, sir; it is not a very interesting subject.  I never think of
it myself.

Algernon.  Very natural, I am sure.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  Lane's views on marriage seem somewhat lax.  Really, if the
lower orders don't set us a good example, what on earth is the use of
them?  They seem, as a class, to have absolutely no sense of moral
responsibility.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Mr. Ernest Worthing.

[Enter Jack.]

[Lane goes out_._]

Algernon.  How are you, my dear Ernest?  What brings you up to town?

Jack.  Oh, pleasure, pleasure!  What else should bring one anywhere?
Eating as usual, I see, Algy!

Algernon.  [Stiffly_._]  I believe it is customary in good society to
take some slight refreshment at five o'clock.  Where have you been since
last Thursday?

Jack.  [Sitting down on the sofa.]  In the country.

Algernon.  What on earth do you do there?

Jack.  [Pulling off his gloves_._]  When one is in town one amuses
oneself.  When one is in the country one amuses other people.  It is
excessively boring.

Algernon.  And who are the people you amuse?

Jack.  [Airily_._]  Oh, neighbours, neighbours.

Algernon.  Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?

Jack.  Perfectly horrid!  Never speak to one of them.

Algernon.  How immensely you must amuse them!  [Goes over and takes
sandwich.]  By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?

Jack.  Eh?  Shropshire?  Yes, of course.  Hallo!  Why all these cups?  Why
cucumber sandwiches?  Why such reckless extravagance in one so young?  Who
is coming to tea?

Algernon.  Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.

Jack.  How perfectly delightful!

Algernon.  Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't
quite approve of your being here.

Jack.  May I ask why?

Algernon.  My dear fellow, the way you flirt with Gwendolen is perfectly
disgraceful.  It is almost as bad as the way Gwendolen flirts with you.

Jack.  I am in love with Gwendolen.  I have come up to town expressly to
propose to her.

Algernon.  I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . . I call that
business.

Jack.  How utterly unromantic you are!

Algernon.  I really don't see anything romantic in proposing.  It is very
romantic to be in love.  But there is nothing romantic about a definite
proposal.  Why, one may be accepted.  One usually is, I believe.  Then
the excitement is all over.  The very essence of romance is uncertainty.
If ever I get married, I'll certainly try to forget the fact.

Jack.  I have no doubt about that, dear Algy.  The Divorce Court was
specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously
constituted.

Algernon.  Oh! there is no use speculating on that subject.  Divorces are
made in Heaven--[Jack puts out his hand to take a sandwich.  Algernon at
once interferes.]  Please don't touch the cucumber sandwiches.  They are
ordered specially for Aunt Augusta.  [Takes one and eats it.]

Jack.  Well, you have been eating them all the time.

Algernon.  That is quite a different matter.  She is my aunt.  [Takes
plate from below.]  Have some bread and butter.  The bread and butter is
for Gwendolen.  Gwendolen is devoted to bread and butter.

Jack.  [Advancing to table and helping himself.]  And very good bread and
butter it is too.

Algernon.  Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going to
eat it all.  You behave as if you were married to her already.  You are
not married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be.

Jack.  Why on earth do you say that?

Algernon.  Well, in the first place girls never marry the men they flirt
with.  Girls don't think it right.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't.  It is a great truth.  It accounts for the
extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place.  In
the second place, I don't give my consent.

Jack.  Your consent!

Algernon.  My dear fellow, Gwendolen is my first cousin.  And before I
allow you to marry her, you will have to clear up the whole question of
Cecily.  [Rings bell.]

Jack.  Cecily!  What on earth do you mean?  What do you mean, Algy, by
Cecily!  I don't know any one of the name of Cecily.

[Enter Lane.]

Algernon.  Bring me that cigarette case Mr. Worthing left in the smoking-
room the last time he dined here.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Lane goes out.]

Jack.  Do you mean to say you have had my cigarette case all this time?  I
wish to goodness you had let me know.  I have been writing frantic
letters to Scotland Yard about it.  I was very nearly offering a large
reward.

Algernon.  Well, I wish you would offer one.  I happen to be more than
usually hard up.

Jack.  There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is
found.

[Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.  Algernon takes it at
once.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say.  [Opens
case and examines it.]  However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look
at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all.

Jack.  Of course it's mine.  [Moving to him.]  You have seen me with it a
hundred times, and you have no right whatsoever to read what is written
inside.  It is a very ungentlemanly thing to read a private cigarette
case.

Algernon.  Oh! it is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one
should read and what one shouldn't.  More than half of modern culture
depends on what one shouldn't read.

Jack.  I am quite aware of the fact, and I don't propose to discuss
modern culture.  It isn't the sort of thing one should talk of in
private.  I simply want my cigarette case back.

Algernon.  Yes; but this isn't your cigarette case.  This cigarette case
is a present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn't
know any one of that name.

Jack.  Well, if you want to know, Cecily happens to be my aunt.

Algernon.  Your aunt!

Jack.  Yes.  Charming old lady she is, too.  Lives at Tunbridge Wells.
Just give it back to me, Algy.

Algernon.  [Retreating to back of sofa.]  But why does she call herself
little Cecily if she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells?
[Reading.]  'From little Cecily with her fondest love.'

Jack.  [Moving to sofa and kneeling upon it.]  My dear fellow, what on
earth is there in that?  Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall.
That is a matter that surely an aunt may be allowed to decide for
herself.  You seem to think that every aunt should be exactly like your
aunt!  That is absurd!  For Heaven's sake give me back my cigarette case.
[Follows Algernon round the room.]

Algernon.  Yes.  But why does your aunt call you her uncle?  'From little
Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack.'  There is no
objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no
matter what her size may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I
can't quite make out.  Besides, your name isn't Jack at all; it is
Ernest.

Jack.  It isn't Ernest; it's Jack.

Algernon.  You have always told me it was Ernest.  I have introduced you
to every one as Ernest.  You answer to the name of Ernest.  You look as
if your name was Ernest.  You are the most earnest-looking person I ever
saw in my life.  It is perfectly absurd your saying that your name isn't
Ernest.  It's on your cards.  Here is one of them.  [Taking it from
case.]  'Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.'  I'll keep this as a
proof that your name is Ernest if ever you attempt to deny it to me, or
to Gwendolen, or to any one else.  [Puts the card in his pocket.]

Jack.  Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack in the country, and the
cigarette case was given to me in the country.

Algernon.  Yes, but that does not account for the fact that your small
Aunt Cecily, who lives at Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle.
Come, old boy, you had much better have the thing out at once.

Jack.  My dear Algy, you talk exactly as if you were a dentist.  It is
very vulgar to talk like a dentist when one isn't a dentist.  It produces
a false impression.

Algernon.  Well, that is exactly what dentists always do.  Now, go on!
Tell me the whole thing.  I may mention that I have always suspected you
of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it
now.

Jack.  Bunburyist? What on earth do you mean by a Bunburyist?

Algernon.  I'll reveal to you the meaning of that incomparable expression
as soon as you are kind enough to inform me why you are Ernest in town
and Jack in the country.

Jack.  Well, produce my cigarette case first.

Algernon.  Here it is.  [Hands cigarette case.]  Now produce your
explanation, and pray make it improbable.  [Sits on sofa.]

Jack.  My dear fellow, there is nothing improbable about my explanation
at all.  In fact it's perfectly ordinary.  Old Mr. Thomas Cardew, who
adopted me when I was a little boy, made me in his will guardian to his
grand-daughter, Miss Cecily Cardew.  Cecily, who addresses me as her
uncle from motives of respect that you could not possibly appreciate,
lives at my place in the country under the charge of her admirable
governess, Miss Prism.

Algernon.  Where is that place in the country, by the way?

Jack.  That is nothing to you, dear boy.  You are not going to be invited
. . . I may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.

Algernon.  I suspected that, my dear fellow!  I have Bunburyed all over
Shropshire on two separate occasions.  Now, go on.  Why are you Ernest in
town and Jack in the country?

Jack.  My dear Algy, I don't know whether you will be able to understand
my real motives.  You are hardly serious enough.  When one is placed in
the position of guardian, one has to adopt a very high moral tone on all
subjects.  It's one's duty to do so.  And as a high moral tone can hardly
be said to conduce very much to either one's health or one's happiness,
in order to get up to town I have always pretended to have a younger
brother of the name of Ernest, who lives in the Albany, and gets into the
most dreadful scrapes.  That, my dear Algy, is the whole truth pure and
simple.

Algernon.  The truth is rarely pure and never simple.  Modern life would
be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete
impossibility!

Jack.  That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.

Algernon.  Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow.  Don't
try it.  You should leave that to people who haven't been at a
University.  They do it so well in the daily papers.  What you really are
is a Bunburyist.  I was quite right in saying you were a Bunburyist.  You
are one of the most advanced Bunburyists I know.

Jack.  What on earth do you mean?

Algernon.  You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest,
in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.  I
have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order
that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.  Bunbury
is perfectly invaluable.  If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad
health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-
night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a
week.

Jack.  I haven't asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.

Algernon.  I know.  You are absurdly careless about sending out
invitations.  It is very foolish of you.  Nothing annoys people so much
as not receiving invitations.

Jack.  You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.

Algernon.  I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the
kind.  To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite
enough to dine with one's own relations.  In the second place, whenever I
do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent
down with either no woman at all, or two.  In the third place, I know
perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.  She will place
me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the
dinner-table.  That is not very pleasant.  Indeed, it is not even decent
. . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.  The amount
of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly
scandalous.  It looks so bad.  It is simply washing one's clean linen in
public.  Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I
naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.  I want to tell you the
rules.

Jack.  I'm not a Bunburyist at all.  If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going
to kill my brother, indeed I think I'll kill him in any case.  Cecily is
a little too much interested in him.  It is rather a bore.  So I am going
to get rid of Ernest.  And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr.
. . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.

Algernon.  Nothing will induce me to part with Bunbury, and if you ever
get married, which seems to me extremely problematic, you will be very
glad to know Bunbury.  A man who marries without knowing Bunbury has a
very tedious time of it.

Jack.  That is nonsense.  If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and
she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I
certainly won't want to know Bunbury.

Algernon.  Then your wife will.  You don't seem to realise, that in
married life three is company and two is none.

Jack.  [Sententiously.]  That, my dear young friend, is the theory that
the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years.

Algernon.  Yes; and that the happy English home has proved in half the
time.

Jack.  For heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical.  It's perfectly easy
to be cynical.

Algernon.  My dear fellow, it isn't easy to be anything nowadays.  There's
such a lot of beastly competition about.  [The sound of an electric bell
is heard.]  Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta.  Only relatives, or creditors,
ever ring in that Wagnerian manner.  Now, if I get her out of the way for
ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to
Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis's?

Jack.  I suppose so, if you want to.

Algernon.  Yes, but you must be serious about it.  I hate people who are
not serious about meals.  It is so shallow of them.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Lady Bracknell and Miss Fairfax.

[Algernon goes forward to meet them.  Enter Lady Bracknell and
Gwendolen.]

Lady Bracknell.  Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are behaving
very well.

Algernon.  I'm feeling very well, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  That's not quite the same thing.  In fact the two things
rarely go together.  [Sees Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.]

Algernon.  [To Gwendolen.]  Dear me, you are smart!

Gwendolen.  I am always smart!  Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Oh! I hope I am not that.  It would leave no room for
developments, and I intend to develop in many directions.  [Gwendolen and
Jack sit down together in the corner.]

Lady Bracknell.  I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was
obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury.  I hadn't been there since her poor
husband's death.  I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty
years younger.  And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice
cucumber sandwiches you promised me.

Algernon.  Certainly, Aunt Augusta.  [Goes over to tea-table.]

Lady Bracknell.  Won't you come and sit here, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am.

Algernon.  [Picking up empty plate in horror.]  Good heavens!  Lane!  Why
are there no cucumber sandwiches?  I ordered them specially.

Lane.  [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning,
sir.  I went down twice.

Algernon.  No cucumbers!

Lane.  No, sir.  Not even for ready money.

Algernon.  That will do, Lane, thank you.

Lane.  Thank you, sir.  [Goes out.]

Algernon.  I am greatly distressed, Aunt Augusta, about there being no
cucumbers, not even for ready money.

Lady Bracknell.  It really makes no matter, Algernon.  I had some
crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now.

Algernon.  I hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.

Lady Bracknell.  It certainly has changed its colour.  From what cause I,
of course, cannot say.  [Algernon crosses and hands tea.]  Thank you.
I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon.  I am going to send you
down with Mary Farquhar.  She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to
her husband.  It's delightful to watch them.

Algernon.  I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after all.

Lady Bracknell.  [Frowning.]  I hope not, Algernon.  It would put my
table completely out.  Your uncle would have to dine upstairs.
Fortunately he is accustomed to that.

Algernon.  It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible
disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say
that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again.  [Exchanges glances with
Jack.]  They seem to think I should be with him.

Lady Bracknell.  It is very strange.  This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health.

Algernon.  Yes; poor Bunbury is a dreadful invalid.

Lady Bracknell.  Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time
that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whether he was going to live or to die.
This shilly-shallying with the question is absurd.  Nor do I in any way
approve of the modern sympathy with invalids.  I consider it morbid.
Illness of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others.  Health
is the primary duty of life.  I am always telling that to your poor
uncle, but he never seems to take much notice . . . as far as any
improvement in his ailment goes.  I should be much obliged if you would
ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to be kind enough not to have a relapse on
Saturday, for I rely on you to arrange my music for me.  It is my last
reception, and one wants something that will encourage conversation,
particularly at the end of the season when every one has practically said
whatever they had to say, which, in most cases, was probably not much.

Algernon.  I'll speak to Bunbury, Aunt Augusta, if he is still conscious,
and I think I can promise you he'll be all right by Saturday.  Of course
the music is a great difficulty.  You see, if one plays good music,
people don't listen, and if one plays bad music people don't talk.  But
I'll run over the programme I've drawn out, if you will kindly come into
the next room for a moment.

Lady Bracknell.  Thank you, Algernon.  It is very thoughtful of you.
[Rising, and following Algernon.]  I'm sure the programme will be
delightful, after a few expurgations.  French songs I cannot possibly
allow.  People always seem to think that they are improper, and either
look shocked, which is vulgar, or laugh, which is worse.  But German
sounds a thoroughly respectable language, and indeed, I believe is so.
Gwendolen, you will accompany me.

Gwendolen.  Certainly, mamma.

[Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room, Gwendolen remains
behind.]

Jack.  Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  Pray don't talk to me about the weather, Mr. Worthing.
Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain
that they mean something else.  And that makes me so nervous.

Jack.  I do mean something else.

Gwendolen.  I thought so.  In fact, I am never wrong.

Jack.  And I would like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady
Bracknell's temporary absence . . .

Gwendolen.  I would certainly advise you to do so.  Mamma has a way of
coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her
about.

Jack.  [Nervously.]  Miss Fairfax, ever since I met you I have admired
you more than any girl . . . I have ever met since . . . I met you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact.  And I often wish
that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative.  For me you
have always had an irresistible fascination.  Even before I met you I was
far from indifferent to you.  [Jack looks at her in amazement.]  We live,
as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an age of ideals.  The fact is
constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has
reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been
to love some one of the name of Ernest.  There is something in that name
that inspires absolute confidence.  The moment Algernon first mentioned
to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love
you.

Jack.  You really love me, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Passionately!

Jack.  Darling!  You don't know how happy you've made me.

Gwendolen.  My own Ernest!

Jack.  But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my
name wasn't Ernest?

Gwendolen.  But your name is Ernest.

Jack.  Yes, I know it is.  But supposing it was something else?  Do you
mean to say you couldn't love me then?

Gwendolen.  [Glibly.]  Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation,
and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all
to the actual facts of real life, as we know them.

Jack.  Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care
about the name of Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at all.

Gwendolen.  It suits you perfectly.  It is a divine name.  It has a music
of its own.  It produces vibrations.

Jack.  Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names.  I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.

Gwendolen.  Jack? . . . No, there is very little music in the name Jack,
if any at all, indeed.  It does not thrill.  It produces absolutely no
vibrations . . . I have known several Jacks, and they all, without
exception, were more than usually plain.  Besides, Jack is a notorious
domesticity for John!  And I pity any woman who is married to a man
called John.  She would probably never be allowed to know the entrancing
pleasure of a single moment's solitude.  The only really safe name is
Ernest.

Jack.  Gwendolen, I must get christened at once--I mean we must get
married at once.  There is no time to be lost.

Gwendolen.  Married, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  [Astounded.]  Well . . . surely.  You know that I love you, and
you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely
indifferent to me.

Gwendolen.  I adore you.  But you haven't proposed to me yet.  Nothing
has been said at all about marriage.  The subject has not even been
touched on.

Jack.  Well . . . may I propose to you now?

Gwendolen.  I think it would be an admirable opportunity.  And to spare
you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to
tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept
you.

Jack.  Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

Jack.  You know what I have got to say to you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but you don't say it.

Jack.  Gwendolen, will you marry me?  [Goes on his knees.]

Gwendolen.  Of course I will, darling.  How long you have been about it!
I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose.

Jack.  My own one, I have never loved any one in the world but you.

Gwendolen.  Yes, but men often propose for practice.  I know my brother
Gerald does.  All my girl-friends tell me so.  What wonderfully blue eyes
you have, Ernest!  They are quite, quite, blue.  I hope you will always
look at me just like that, especially when there are other people
present.  [Enter Lady Bracknell.]

Lady Bracknell.  Mr. Worthing!  Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent
posture.  It is most indecorous.

Gwendolen.  Mamma!  [He tries to rise; she restrains him.]  I must beg
you to retire.  This is no place for you.  Besides, Mr. Worthing has not
quite finished yet.

Lady Bracknell.  Finished what, may I ask?

Gwendolen.  I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.  [They rise together.]

Lady Bracknell.  Pardon me, you are not engaged to any one.  When you do
become engaged to some one, I, or your father, should his health permit
him, will inform you of the fact.  An engagement should come on a young
girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be.  It is
hardly a matter that she could be allowed to arrange for herself . . .
And now I have a few questions to put to you, Mr. Worthing.  While I am
making these inquiries, you, Gwendolen, will wait for me below in the
carriage.

Gwendolen.  [Reproachfully.]  Mamma!

Lady Bracknell.  In the carriage, Gwendolen!  [Gwendolen goes to the
door.  She and Jack blow kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell's
back.  Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if she could not understand
what the noise was.  Finally turns round.]  Gwendolen, the carriage!

Gwendolen.  Yes, mamma.  [Goes out, looking back at Jack.]

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down.]  You can take a seat, Mr. Worthing.

[Looks in her pocket for note-book and pencil.]

Jack.  Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.

Lady Bracknell.  [Pencil and note-book in hand.]  I feel bound to tell
you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I
have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has.  We work together,
in fact.  However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your
answers be what a really affectionate mother requires.  Do you smoke?

Jack.  Well, yes, I must admit I smoke.

Lady Bracknell.  I am glad to hear it.  A man should always have an
occupation of some kind.  There are far too many idle men in London as it
is.  How old are you?

Jack.  Twenty-nine.

Lady Bracknell.  A very good age to be married at.  I have always been of
opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either
everything or nothing.  Which do you know?

Jack.  [After some hesitation.]  I know nothing, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  I am pleased to hear it.  I do not approve of anything
that tampers with natural ignorance.  Ignorance is like a delicate exotic
fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone.  The whole theory of modern
education is radically unsound.  Fortunately in England, at any rate,
education produces no effect whatsoever.  If it did, it would prove a
serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of
violence in Grosvenor Square.  What is your income?

Jack.  Between seven and eight thousand a year.

Lady Bracknell.  [Makes a note in her book.]  In land, or in investments?

Jack.  In investments, chiefly.

Lady Bracknell.  That is satisfactory.  What between the duties expected
of one during one's lifetime, and the duties exacted from one after one's
death, land has ceased to be either a profit or a pleasure.  It gives one
position, and prevents one from keeping it up.  That's all that can be
said about land.

Jack.  I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it,
about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my
real income.  In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the
only people who make anything out of it.

Lady Bracknell.  A country house!  How many bedrooms?  Well, that point
can be cleared up afterwards.  You have a town house, I hope?  A girl
with a simple, unspoiled nature, like Gwendolen, could hardly be expected
to reside in the country.

Jack.  Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year
to Lady Bloxham.  Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six
months' notice.

Lady Bracknell.  Lady Bloxham?  I don't know her.

Jack.  Oh, she goes about very little.  She is a lady considerably
advanced in years.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability of
character.  What number in Belgrave Square?

Jack.  149.

Lady Bracknell.  [Shaking her head.]  The unfashionable side.  I thought
there was something.  However, that could easily be altered.

Jack.  Do you mean the fashion, or the side?

Lady Bracknell.  [Sternly.]  Both, if necessary, I presume.  What are
your politics?

Jack.  Well, I am afraid I really have none.  I am a Liberal Unionist.

Lady Bracknell.  Oh, they count as Tories.  They dine with us.  Or come
in the evening, at any rate.  Now to minor matters.  Are your parents
living?

Jack.  I have lost both my parents.

Lady Bracknell.  To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded as a
misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness.  Who was your father?
He was evidently a man of some wealth.  Was he born in what the Radical
papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the
aristocracy?

Jack.  I am afraid I really don't know.  The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I
said I had lost my parents.  It would be nearer the truth to say that my
parents seem to have lost me . . . I don't actually know who I am by
birth.  I was . . . well, I was found.

Lady Bracknell.  Found!

Jack.  The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable
and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing,
because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his
pocket at the time.  Worthing is a place in Sussex.  It is a seaside
resort.

Lady Bracknell.  Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-class
ticket for this seaside resort find you?

Jack.  [Gravely.]  In a hand-bag.

Lady Bracknell.  A hand-bag?

Jack.  [Very seriously.]  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I was in a hand-bag--a
somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it--an ordinary
hand-bag in fact.

Lady Bracknell.  In what locality did this Mr. James, or Thomas, Cardew
come across this ordinary hand-bag?

Jack.  In the cloak-room at Victoria Station.  It was given to him in
mistake for his own.

Lady Bracknell.  The cloak-room at Victoria Station?

Jack.  Yes.  The Brighton line.

Lady Bracknell.  The line is immaterial.  Mr. Worthing, I confess I feel
somewhat bewildered by what you have just told me.  To be born, or at any
rate bred, in a hand-bag, whether it had handles or not, seems to me to
display a contempt for the ordinary decencies of family life that reminds
one of the worst excesses of the French Revolution.  And I presume you
know what that unfortunate movement led to?  As for the particular
locality in which the hand-bag was found, a cloak-room at a railway
station might serve to conceal a social indiscretion--has probably,
indeed, been used for that purpose before now--but it could hardly be
regarded as an assured basis for a recognised position in good society.

Jack.  May I ask you then what you would advise me to do?  I need hardly
say I would do anything in the world to ensure Gwendolen's happiness.

Lady Bracknell.  I would strongly advise you, Mr. Worthing, to try and
acquire some relations as soon as possible, and to make a definite effort
to produce at any rate one parent, of either sex, before the season is
quite over.

Jack.  Well, I don't see how I could possibly manage to do that.  I can
produce the hand-bag at any moment.  It is in my dressing-room at home.  I
really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  Me, sir!  What has it to do with me?  You can hardly
imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only
daughter--a girl brought up with the utmost care--to marry into a cloak-
room, and form an alliance with a parcel?  Good morning, Mr. Worthing!

[Lady Bracknell sweeps out in majestic indignation.]

Jack.  Good morning!  [Algernon, from the other room, strikes up the
Wedding March.  Jack looks perfectly furious, and goes to the door.]  For
goodness' sake don't play that ghastly tune, Algy.  How idiotic you are!

[The music stops and Algernon enters cheerily.]

Algernon.  Didn't it go off all right, old boy?  You don't mean to say
Gwendolen refused you?  I know it is a way she has.  She is always
refusing people.  I think it is most ill-natured of her.

Jack.  Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet.  As far as she is
concerned, we are engaged.  Her mother is perfectly unbearable.  Never
met such a Gorgon . . . I don't really know what a Gorgon is like, but I
am quite sure that Lady Bracknell is one.  In any case, she is a monster,
without being a myth, which is rather unfair . . . I beg your pardon,
Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk about your own aunt in that way before
you.

Algernon.  My dear boy, I love hearing my relations abused.  It is the
only thing that makes me put up with them at all.  Relations are simply a
tedious pack of people, who haven't got the remotest knowledge of how to
live, nor the smallest instinct about when to die.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't!

Jack.  Well, I won't argue about the matter.  You always want to argue
about things.

Algernon.  That is exactly what things were originally made for.

Jack.  Upon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot myself . . . [A pause.]
You don't think there is any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother
in about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?

Algernon.  All women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.
No man does.  That's his.

Jack.  Is that clever?

Algernon.  It is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation
in civilised life should be.

Jack.  I am sick to death of cleverness.  Everybody is clever nowadays.
You can't go anywhere without meeting clever people.  The thing has
become an absolute public nuisance.  I wish to goodness we had a few
fools left.

Algernon.  We have.

Jack.  I should extremely like to meet them.  What do they talk about?

Algernon.  The fools?  Oh! about the clever people, of course.

Jack.  What fools!

Algernon.  By the way, did you tell Gwendolen the truth about your being
Ernest in town, and Jack in the country?

Jack.  [In a very patronising manner.]  My dear fellow, the truth isn't
quite the sort of thing one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl.  What
extraordinary ideas you have about the way to behave to a woman!

Algernon.  The only way to behave to a woman is to make love to her, if
she is pretty, and to some one else, if she is plain.

Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense.

Algernon.  What about your brother?  What about the profligate Ernest?

Jack.  Oh, before the end of the week I shall have got rid of him.  I'll
say he died in Paris of apoplexy.  Lots of people die of apoplexy, quite
suddenly, don't they?

Algernon.  Yes, but it's hereditary, my dear fellow.  It's a sort of
thing that runs in families.  You had much better say a severe chill.

Jack.  You are sure a severe chill isn't hereditary, or anything of that
kind?

Algernon.  Of course it isn't!

Jack.  Very well, then.  My poor brother Ernest to carried off suddenly,
in Paris, by a severe chill.  That gets rid of him.

Algernon.  But I thought you said that . . . Miss Cardew was a little too
much interested in your poor brother Ernest?  Won't she feel his loss a
good deal?

Jack.  Oh, that is all right.  Cecily is not a silly romantic girl, I am
glad to say.  She has got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and pays
no attention at all to her lessons.

Algernon.  I would rather like to see Cecily.

Jack.  I will take very good care you never do.  She is excessively
pretty, and she is only just eighteen.

Algernon.  Have you told Gwendolen yet that you have an excessively
pretty ward who is only just eighteen?

Jack.  Oh! one doesn't blurt these things out to people.  Cecily and
Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends.  I'll bet
you anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be
calling each other sister.

Algernon.  Women only do that when they have called each other a lot of
other things first.  Now, my dear boy, if we want to get a good table at
Willis's, we really must go and dress.  Do you know it is nearly seven?

Jack.  [Irritably.]  Oh!  It always is nearly seven.

Algernon.  Well, I'm hungry.

Jack.  I never knew you when you weren't . . .

Algernon.  What shall we do after dinner?  Go to a theatre?

Jack.  Oh no!  I loathe listening.

Algernon.  Well, let us go to the Club?

Jack.  Oh, no!  I hate talking.

Algernon.  Well, we might trot round to the Empire at ten?

Jack.  Oh, no!  I can't bear looking at things.  It is so silly.

Algernon.  Well, what shall we do?

Jack.  Nothing!

Algernon.  It is awfully hard work doing nothing.  However, I don't mind
hard work where there is no definite object of any kind.

[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  Gwendolen, upon my word!

Gwendolen.  Algy, kindly turn your back.  I have something very
particular to say to Mr. Worthing.

Algernon.  Really, Gwendolen, I don't think I can allow this at all.

Gwendolen.  Algy, you always adopt a strictly immoral attitude towards
life.  You are not quite old enough to do that.  [Algernon retires to the
fireplace.]

Jack.  My own darling!

Gwendolen.  Ernest, we may never be married.  From the expression on
mamma's face I fear we never shall.  Few parents nowadays pay any regard
to what their children say to them.  The old-fashioned respect for the
young is fast dying out.  Whatever influence I ever had over mamma, I
lost at the age of three.  But although she may prevent us from becoming
man and wife, and I may marry some one else, and marry often, nothing
that she can possibly do can alter my eternal devotion to you.

Jack.  Dear Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma,
with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my
nature.  Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination.  The
simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to
me.  Your town address at the Albany I have.  What is your address in the
country?

Jack.  The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire.

[Algernon, who has been carefully listening, smiles to himself, and
writes the address on his shirt-cuff.  Then picks up the Railway Guide.]

Gwendolen.  There is a good postal service, I suppose?  It may be
necessary to do something desperate.  That of course will require serious
consideration.  I will communicate with you daily.

Jack.  My own one!

Gwendolen.  How long do you remain in town?

Jack.  Till Monday.

Gwendolen.  Good!  Algy, you may turn round now.

Algernon.  Thanks, I've turned round already.

Gwendolen.  You may also ring the bell.

Jack.  You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?

Gwendolen.  Certainly.

Jack.  [To Lane, who now enters.]  I will see Miss Fairfax out.

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Jack and Gwendolen go off.]

[Lane presents several letters on a salver to Algernon.  It is to be
surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the
envelopes, tears them up.]

Algernon.  A glass of sherry, Lane.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.

Lane.  Yes, sir.

Algernon.  I shall probably not be back till Monday.  You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Handing sherry.]

Algernon.  I hope to-morrow will be a fine day, Lane.

Lane.  It never is, sir.

Algernon.  Lane, you're a perfect pessimist.

Lane.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir.

[Enter Jack.  Lane goes off.]

Jack.  There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared
for in my life.  [Algernon is laughing immoderately.]  What on earth are
you so amused at?

Algernon.  Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that is all.

Jack.  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day.

Algernon.  I love scrapes.  They are the only things that are never
serious.

Jack.  Oh, that's nonsense, Algy.  You never talk anything but nonsense.

Algernon.  Nobody ever does.

[Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.  Algernon lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.]


SECOND ACT


SCENE


Garden at the Manor House.  A flight of grey stone steps leads up to the
house.  The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.  Time of year,
July.  Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a
large yew-tree.

[Miss Prism discovered seated at the table.  Cecily is at the back
watering flowers.]

Miss Prism.  [Calling.]  Cecily, Cecily!  Surely such a utilitarian
occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than
yours?  Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you.
Your German grammar is on the table.  Pray open it at page fifteen.  We
will repeat yesterday's lesson.

Cecily.  [Coming over very slowly.]  But I don't like German.  It isn't
at all a becoming language.  I know perfectly well that I look quite
plain after my German lesson.

Miss Prism.  Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should
improve yourself in every way.  He laid particular stress on your German,
as he was leaving for town yesterday.  Indeed, he always lays stress on
your German when he is leaving for town.

Cecily.  Dear Uncle Jack is so very serious!  Sometimes he is so serious
that I think he cannot be quite well.

Miss Prism.  [Drawing herself up.]  Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one
so comparatively young as he is.  I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility.

Cecily.  I suppose that is why he often looks a little bored when we
three are together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!  I am surprised at you.  Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life.  Idle merriment and triviality would be out of
place in his conversation.  You must remember his constant anxiety about
that unfortunate young man his brother.

Cecily.  I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his
brother, to come down here sometimes.  We might have a good influence
over him, Miss Prism.  I am sure you certainly would.  You know German,
and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much.  [Cecily
begins to write in her diary.]

Miss Prism.  [Shaking her head.]  I do not think that even I could
produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother's
admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating.  Indeed I am not sure
that I would desire to reclaim him.  I am not in favour of this modern
mania for turning bad people into good people at a moment's notice.  As a
man sows so let him reap.  You must put away your diary, Cecily.  I
really don't see why you should keep a diary at all.

Cecily.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my
life.  If I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about
them.

Miss Prism.  Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about
with us.

Cecily.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never
happened, and couldn't possibly have happened.  I believe that Memory is
responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.

Miss Prism.  Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily.
I wrote one myself in earlier days.

Cecily.  Did you really, Miss Prism?  How wonderfully clever you are!  I
hope it did not end happily?  I don't like novels that end happily.  They
depress me so much.

Miss Prism.  The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.  That is what
Fiction means.

Cecily.  I suppose so.  But it seems very unfair.  And was your novel
ever published?

Miss Prism.  Alas! no.  The manuscript unfortunately was abandoned.
[Cecily starts.]  I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.  To
your work, child, these speculations are profitless.

Cecily.  [Smiling.]  But I see dear Dr. Chasuble coming up through the
garden.

Miss Prism.  [Rising and advancing.]  Dr. Chasuble!  This is indeed a
pleasure.

[Enter Canon Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  And how are we this morning?  Miss Prism, you are, I trust,
well?

Cecily.  Miss Prism has just been complaining of a slight headache.  I
think it would do her so much good to have a short stroll with you in the
Park, Dr. Chasuble.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache.

Cecily.  No, dear Miss Prism, I know that, but I felt instinctively that
you had a headache.  Indeed I was thinking about that, and not about my
German lesson, when the Rector came in.

Chasuble.  I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.

Cecily.  Oh, I am afraid I am.

Chasuble.  That is strange.  Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips.  [Miss Prism glares.]  I spoke
metaphorically.--My metaphor was drawn from bees.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, I
suppose, has not returned from town yet?

Miss Prism.  We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.

Chasuble.  Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London.  He is
not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that
unfortunate young man his brother seems to be.  But I must not disturb
Egeria and her pupil any longer.

Miss Prism.  Egeria?  My name is Laetitia, Doctor.

Chasuble.  [Bowing.]  A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan
authors.  I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?

Miss Prism.  I think, dear Doctor, I will have a stroll with you.  I find
I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.

Chasuble.  With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.  We might go as far
as the schools and back.

Miss Prism.  That would be delightful.  Cecily, you will read your
Political Economy in my absence.  The chapter on the Fall of the Rupee
you may omit.  It is somewhat too sensational.  Even these metallic
problems have their melodramatic side.

[Goes down the garden with Dr. Chasuble.]

Cecily.  [Picks up books and throws them back on table.]  Horrid
Political Economy!  Horrid Geography!  Horrid, horrid German!

[Enter Merriman with a card on a salver.]

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station.  He
has brought his luggage with him.

Cecily.  [Takes the card and reads it.]  'Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The
Albany, W.'  Uncle Jack's brother!  Did you tell him Mr. Worthing was in
town?

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  He seemed very much disappointed.  I mentioned
that you and Miss Prism were in the garden.  He said he was anxious to
speak to you privately for a moment.

Cecily.  Ask Mr. Ernest Worthing to come here.  I suppose you had better
talk to the housekeeper about a room for him.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.

[Merriman goes off.]

Cecily.  I have never met any really wicked person before.  I feel rather
frightened.  I am so afraid he will look just like every one else.

[Enter Algernon, very gay and debonnair.]  He does!

Algernon.  [Raising his hat.]  You are my little cousin Cecily, I'm sure.

Cecily.  You are under some strange mistake.  I am not little.  In fact,
I believe I am more than usually tall for my age.  [Algernon is rather
taken aback.]  But I am your cousin Cecily.  You, I see from your card,
are Uncle Jack's brother, my cousin Ernest, my wicked cousin Ernest.

Algernon.  Oh! I am not really wicked at all, cousin Cecily.  You mustn't
think that I am wicked.

Cecily.  If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in
a very inexcusable manner.  I hope you have not been leading a double
life, pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time.  That
would be hypocrisy.

Algernon.  [Looks at her in amazement.]  Oh!  Of course I have been
rather reckless.

Cecily.  I am glad to hear it.

Algernon.  In fact, now you mention the subject, I have been very bad in
my own small way.

Cecily.  I don't think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure
it must have been very pleasant.

Algernon.  It is much pleasanter being here with you.

Cecily.  I can't understand how you are here at all.  Uncle Jack won't be
back till Monday afternoon.

Algernon.  That is a great disappointment.  I am obliged to go up by the
first train on Monday morning.  I have a business appointment that I am
anxious . . . to miss?

Cecily.  Couldn't you miss it anywhere but in London?

Algernon.  No: the appointment is in London.

Cecily.  Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a
business engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of
life, but still I think you had better wait till Uncle Jack arrives.  I
know he wants to speak to you about your emigrating.

Algernon.  About my what?

Cecily.  Your emigrating.  He has gone up to buy your outfit.

Algernon.  I certainly wouldn't let Jack buy my outfit.  He has no taste
in neckties at all.

Cecily.  I don't think you will require neckties.  Uncle Jack is sending
you to Australia.

Algernon.  Australia!  I'd sooner die.

Cecily.  Well, he said at dinner on Wednesday night, that you would have
to choose between this world, the next world, and Australia.

Algernon.  Oh, well!  The accounts I have received of Australia and the
next world, are not particularly encouraging.  This world is good enough
for me, cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  Yes, but are you good enough for it?

Algernon.  I'm afraid I'm not that.  That is why I want you to reform me.
You might make that your mission, if you don't mind, cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  I'm afraid I've no time, this afternoon.

Algernon.  Well, would you mind my reforming myself this afternoon?

Cecily.  It is rather Quixotic of you.  But I think you should try.

Algernon.  I will.  I feel better already.

Cecily.  You are looking a little worse.

Algernon.  That is because I am hungry.

Cecily.  How thoughtless of me.  I should have remembered that when one
is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome
meals.  Won't you come in?

Algernon.  Thank you.  Might I have a buttonhole first?  I never have any
appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.

Cecily.  A Marechal Niel?  [Picks up scissors.]

Algernon.  No, I'd sooner have a pink rose.

Cecily.  Why?  [Cuts a flower.]

Algernon.  Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin Cecily.

Cecily.  I don't think it can be right for you to talk to me like that.
Miss Prism never says such things to me.

Algernon.  Then Miss Prism is a short-sighted old lady.  [Cecily puts the
rose in his buttonhole.]  You are the prettiest girl I ever saw.

Cecily.  Miss Prism says that all good looks are a snare.

Algernon.  They are a snare that every sensible man would like to be
caught in.

Cecily.  Oh, I don't think I would care to catch a sensible man.  I
shouldn't know what to talk to him about.

[They pass into the house.  Miss Prism and Dr. Chasuble return.]

Miss Prism.  You are too much alone, dear Dr. Chasuble.  You should get
married.  A misanthrope I can understand--a womanthrope, never!

Chasuble.  [With a scholar's shudder.]  Believe me, I do not deserve so
neologistic a phrase.  The precept as well as the practice of the
Primitive Church was distinctly against matrimony.

Miss Prism.  [Sententiously.]  That is obviously the reason why the
Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day.  And you do not
seem to realise, dear Doctor, that by persistently remaining single, a
man converts himself into a permanent public temptation.  Men should be
more careful; this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray.

Chasuble.  But is a man not equally attractive when married?

Miss Prism.  No married man is ever attractive except to his wife.

Chasuble.  And often, I've been told, not even to her.

Miss Prism.  That depends on the intellectual sympathies of the woman.
Maturity can always be depended on.  Ripeness can be trusted.  Young
women are green.  [Dr. Chasuble starts.]  I spoke horticulturally.  My
metaphor was drawn from fruits.  But where is Cecily?

Chasuble.  Perhaps she followed us to the schools.

[Enter Jack slowly from the back of the garden.  He is dressed in the
deepest mourning, with crape hatband and black gloves.]

Miss Prism.  Mr. Worthing!

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing?

Miss Prism.  This is indeed a surprise.  We did not look for you till
Monday afternoon.

Jack.  [Shakes Miss Prism's hand in a tragic manner.]  I have returned
sooner than I expected.  Dr. Chasuble, I hope you are well?

Chasuble.  Dear Mr. Worthing, I trust this garb of woe does not betoken
some terrible calamity?

Jack.  My brother.

Miss Prism.  More shameful debts and extravagance?

Chasuble.  Still leading his life of pleasure?

Jack.  [Shaking his head.]  Dead!

Chasuble.  Your brother Ernest dead?

Jack.  Quite dead.

Miss Prism.  What a lesson for him!  I trust he will profit by it.

Chasuble.  Mr. Worthing, I offer you my sincere condolence.  You have at
least the consolation of knowing that you were always the most generous
and forgiving of brothers.

Jack.  Poor Ernest!  He had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow.

Chasuble.  Very sad indeed.  Were you with him at the end?

Jack.  No.  He died abroad; in Paris, in fact.  I had a telegram last
night from the manager of the Grand Hotel.

Chasuble.  Was the cause of death mentioned?

Jack.  A severe chill, it seems.

Miss Prism.  As a man sows, so shall he reap.

Chasuble.  [Raising his hand.]  Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!  None
of us are perfect.  I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.  Will
the interment take place here?

Jack.  No.  He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris.

Chasuble.  In Paris!  [Shakes his head.]  I fear that hardly points to
any very serious state of mind at the last.  You would no doubt wish me
to make some slight allusion to this tragic domestic affliction next
Sunday.  [Jack presses his hand convulsively.]  My sermon on the meaning
of the manna in the wilderness can be adapted to almost any occasion,
joyful, or, as in the present case, distressing.  [All sigh.]  I have
preached it at harvest celebrations, christenings, confirmations, on days
of humiliation and festal days.  The last time I delivered it was in the
Cathedral, as a charity sermon on behalf of the Society for the
Prevention of Discontent among the Upper Orders.  The Bishop, who was
present, was much struck by some of the analogies I drew.

Jack.  Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr.
Chasuble?  I suppose you know how to christen all right?  [Dr. Chasuble
looks astounded.]  I mean, of course, you are continually christening,
aren't you?

Miss Prism.  It is, I regret to say, one of the Rector's most constant
duties in this parish.  I have often spoken to the poorer classes on the
subject.  But they don't seem to know what thrift is.

Chasuble.  But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing?  Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

Jack.  Oh yes.

Miss Prism.  [Bitterly.]  People who live entirely for pleasure usually
are.

Jack.  But it is not for any child, dear Doctor.  I am very fond of
children.  No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this
afternoon, if you have nothing better to do.

Chasuble.  But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?

Jack.  I don't remember anything about it.

Chasuble.  But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

Jack.  I certainly intend to have.  Of course I don't know if the thing
would bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now.

Chasuble.  Not at all.  The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of
adults is a perfectly canonical practice.

Jack.  Immersion!

Chasuble.  You need have no apprehensions.  Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable.  Our weather is so changeable.  At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

Jack.  Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you.

Chasuble.  Perfectly, perfectly!  In fact I have two similar ceremonies
to perform at that time.  A case of twins that occurred recently in one
of the outlying cottages on your own estate.  Poor Jenkins the carter, a
most hard-working man.

Jack.  Oh!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies.  It would be childish.  Would half-past five do?

Chasuble.  Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.]  And now, dear Mr.
Worthing, I will not intrude any longer into a house of sorrow.  I would
merely beg you not to be too much bowed down by grief.  What seem to us
bitter trials are often blessings in disguise.

Miss Prism.  This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.

[Enter Cecily from the house.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack!  Oh, I am pleased to see you back.  But what horrid
clothes you have got on!  Do go and change them.

Miss Prism.  Cecily!

Chasuble.  My child! my child!  [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her
brow in a melancholy manner.]

Cecily.  What is the matter, Uncle Jack?  Do look happy!  You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.  Who do you
think is in the dining-room?  Your brother!

Jack.  Who?

Cecily.  Your brother Ernest.  He arrived about half an hour ago.

Jack.  What nonsense!  I haven't got a brother.

Cecily.  Oh, don't say that.  However badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother.  You couldn't be so heartless as to
disown him.  I'll tell him to come out.  And you will shake hands with
him, won't you, Uncle Jack?  [Runs back into the house.]

Chasuble.  These are very joyful tidings.

Miss Prism.  After we had all been resigned to his loss, his sudden
return seems to me peculiarly distressing.

Jack.  My brother is in the dining-room?  I don't know what it all means.
I think it is perfectly absurd.

[Enter Algernon and Cecily hand in hand.  They come slowly up to Jack.]

Jack.  Good heavens!  [Motions Algernon away.]

Algernon.  Brother John, I have come down from town to tell you that I am
very sorry for all the trouble I have given you, and that I intend to
lead a better life in the future.  [Jack glares at him and does not take
his hand.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, you are not going to refuse your own brother's hand?

Jack.  Nothing will induce me to take his hand.  I think his coming down
here disgraceful.  He knows perfectly well why.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, do be nice.  There is some good in every one.  Ernest
has just been telling me about his poor invalid friend Mr. Bunbury whom
he goes to visit so often.  And surely there must be much good in one who
is kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed
of pain.

Jack.  Oh! he has been talking about Bunbury, has he?

Cecily.  Yes, he has told me all about poor Mr. Bunbury, and his terrible
state of health.

Jack.  Bunbury!  Well, I won't have him talk to you about Bunbury or
about anything else.  It is enough to drive one perfectly frantic.

Algernon.  Of course I admit that the faults were all on my side.  But I
must say that I think that Brother John's coldness to me is peculiarly
painful.  I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering
it is the first time I have come here.

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, if you don't shake hands with Ernest I will never
forgive you.

Jack.  Never forgive me?

Cecily.  Never, never, never!

Jack.  Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it.  [Shakes with
Algernon and glares.]

Chasuble.  It's pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation?
I think we might leave the two brothers together.

Miss Prism.  Cecily, you will come with us.

Cecily.  Certainly, Miss Prism.  My little task of reconciliation is
over.

Chasuble.  You have done a beautiful action to-day, dear child.

Miss Prism.  We must not be premature in our judgments.

Cecily.  I feel very happy.  [They all go off except Jack and Algernon.]

Jack.  You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon
as possible.  I don't allow any Bunburying here.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  I have put Mr. Ernest's things in the room next to yours, sir.
I suppose that is all right?

Jack.  What?

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest's luggage, sir.  I have unpacked it and put it in
the room next to your own.

Jack.  His luggage?

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes,
and a large luncheon-basket.

Algernon.  I am afraid I can't stay more than a week this time.

Jack.  Merriman, order the dog-cart at once.  Mr. Ernest has been
suddenly called back to town.

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  [Goes back into the house.]

Algernon.  What a fearful liar you are, Jack.  I have not been called
back to town at all.

Jack.  Yes, you have.

Algernon.  I haven't heard any one call me.

Jack.  Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.

Algernon.  My duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my pleasures
in the smallest degree.

Jack.  I can quite understand that.

Algernon.  Well, Cecily is a darling.

Jack.  You are not to talk of Miss Cardew like that.  I don't like it.

Algernon.  Well, I don't like your clothes.  You look perfectly
ridiculous in them.  Why on earth don't you go up and change?  It is
perfectly childish to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually
staying for a whole week with you in your house as a guest.  I call it
grotesque.

Jack.  You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest
or anything else.  You have got to leave . . . by the four-five train.

Algernon.  I certainly won't leave you so long as you are in mourning.  It
would be most unfriendly.  If I were in mourning you would stay with me,
I suppose.  I should think it very unkind if you didn't.

Jack.  Well, will you go if I change my clothes?

Algernon.  Yes, if you are not too long.  I never saw anybody take so
long to dress, and with such little result.

Jack.  Well, at any rate, that is better than being always over-dressed
as you are.

Algernon.  If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it
by being always immensely over-educated.

Jack.  Your vanity is ridiculous, your conduct an outrage, and your
presence in my garden utterly absurd.  However, you have got to catch the
four-five, and I hope you will have a pleasant journey back to town.  This
Bunburying, as you call it, has not been a great success for you.

[Goes into the house.]

Algernon.  I think it has been a great success.  I'm in love with Cecily,
and that is everything.

[Enter Cecily at the back of the garden.  She picks up the can and begins
to water the flowers.]  But I must see her before I go, and make
arrangements for another Bunbury.  Ah, there she is.

Cecily.  Oh, I merely came back to water the roses.  I thought you were
with Uncle Jack.

Algernon.  He's gone to order the dog-cart for me.

Cecily.  Oh, is he going to take you for a nice drive?

Algernon.  He's going to send me away.

Cecily.  Then have we got to part?

Algernon.  I am afraid so.  It's a very painful parting.

Cecily.  It is always painful to part from people whom one has known for
a very brief space of time.  The absence of old friends one can endure
with equanimity.  But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one
has just been introduced is almost unbearable.

Algernon.  Thank you.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is at the door, sir.  [Algernon looks appealingly
at Cecily.]

Cecily.  It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Exit Merriman.]

Algernon.  I hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite
frankly and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible
personification of absolute perfection.

Cecily.  I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest.  If you
will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary.  [Goes over to
table and begins writing in diary.]

Algernon.  Do you really keep a diary?  I'd give anything to look at it.
May I?

Cecily.  Oh no.  [Puts her hand over it.]  You see, it is simply a very
young girl's record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently
meant for publication.  When it appears in volume form I hope you will
order a copy.  But pray, Ernest, don't stop.  I delight in taking down
from dictation.  I have reached 'absolute perfection'.  You can go on.  I
am quite ready for more.

Algernon.  [Somewhat taken aback.]  Ahem!  Ahem!

Cecily.  Oh, don't cough, Ernest.  When one is dictating one should speak
fluently and not cough.  Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough.
[Writes as Algernon speaks.]

Algernon.  [Speaking very rapidly.]  Cecily, ever since I first looked
upon your wonderful and incomparable beauty, I have dared to love you
wildly, passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.

Cecily.  I don't think that you should tell me that you love me wildly,
passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.  Hopelessly doesn't seem to make
much sense, does it?

Algernon.  Cecily!

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is waiting, sir.

Algernon.  Tell it to come round next week, at the same hour.

Merriman.  [Looks at Cecily, who makes no sign.]  Yes, sir.

[Merriman retires.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack would be very much annoyed if he knew you were
staying on till next week, at the same hour.

Algernon.  Oh, I don't care about Jack.  I don't care for anybody in the
whole world but you.  I love you, Cecily.  You will marry me, won't you?

Cecily.  You silly boy!  Of course.  Why, we have been engaged for the
last three months.

Algernon.  For the last three months?

Cecily.  Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.

Algernon.  But how did we become engaged?

Cecily.  Well, ever since dear Uncle Jack first confessed to us that he
had a younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have
formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.  And
of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.  One
feels there must be something in him, after all.  I daresay it was
foolish of me, but I fell in love with you, Ernest.

Algernon.  Darling!  And when was the engagement actually settled?

Cecily.  On the 14th of February last.  Worn out by your entire ignorance
of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and
after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree
here.  The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is
the little bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to
wear.

Algernon.  Did I give you this?  It's very pretty, isn't it?

Cecily.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest.  It's the excuse
I've always given for your leading such a bad life.  And this is the box
in which I keep all your dear letters.  [Kneels at table, opens box, and
produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.]

Algernon.  My letters!  But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters.

Cecily.  You need hardly remind me of that, Ernest.  I remember only too
well that I was forced to write your letters for you.  I wrote always
three times a week, and sometimes oftener.

Algernon.  Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?

Cecily.  Oh, I couldn't possibly.  They would make you far too conceited.
[Replaces box.]  The three you wrote me after I had broken off the
engagement are so beautiful, and so badly spelled, that even now I can
hardly read them without crying a little.

Algernon.  But was our engagement ever broken off?

Cecily.  Of course it was.  On the 22nd of last March.  You can see the
entry if you like. [Shows diary.]  'To-day I broke off my engagement with
Ernest.  I feel it is better to do so.  The weather still continues
charming.'

Algernon.  But why on earth did you break it off?  What had I done?  I
had done nothing at all.  Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off.  Particularly when the weather was so charming.

Cecily.  It would hardly have been a really serious engagement if it
hadn't been broken off at least once.  But I forgave you before the week
was out.

Algernon.  [Crossing to her, and kneeling.]  What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily.

Cecily.  You dear romantic boy.  [He kisses her, she puts her fingers
through his hair.]  I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?

Algernon.  Yes, darling, with a little help from others.

Cecily.  I am so glad.

Algernon.  You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met
you.  Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.

Algernon.  Yes, of course.  [Nervously.]

Cecily.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a
girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest.  [Algernon
rises, Cecily also.]  There is something in that name that seems to
inspire absolute confidence.  I pity any poor married woman whose husband
is not called Ernest.

Algernon.  But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love me
if I had some other name?

Cecily.  But what name?

Algernon.  Oh, any name you like--Algernon--for instance . . .

Cecily.  But I don't like the name of Algernon.

Algernon.  Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really
can't see why you should object to the name of Algernon.  It is not at
all a bad name.  In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name.  Half of the
chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon.  But
seriously, Cecily . . . [Moving to her] . . . if my name was Algy,
couldn't you love me?

Cecily.  [Rising.]  I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your
character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided
attention.

Algernon.  Ahem!  Cecily!  [Picking up hat.]  Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

Cecily.  Oh, yes.  Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man.  He has never
written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.

Algernon.  I must see him at once on a most important christening--I mean
on most important business.

Cecily.  Oh!

Algernon.  I shan't be away more than half an hour.

Cecily.  Considering that we have been engaged since February the 14th,
and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather
hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour.
Couldn't you make it twenty minutes?

Algernon.  I'll be back in no time.

[Kisses her and rushes down the garden.]

Cecily.  What an impetuous boy he is!  I like his hair so much.  I must
enter his proposal in my diary.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing.  On very
important business, Miss Fairfax states.

Cecily.  Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?

Merriman.  Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some
time ago.

Cecily.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon.  And you can bring tea.

Merriman.  Yes, Miss.  [Goes out.]

Cecily.  Miss Fairfax!  I suppose one of the many good elderly women who
are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in
London.  I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic
work.  I think it is so forward of them.

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  Miss Fairfax.

[Enter Gwendolen.]

[Exit Merriman.]

Cecily.  [Advancing to meet her.]  Pray let me introduce myself to you.
My name is Cecily Cardew.

Gwendolen.  Cecily Cardew?  [Moving to her and shaking hands.]  What a
very sweet name!  Something tells me that we are going to be great
friends.  I like you already more than I can say.  My first impressions
of people are never wrong.

Cecily.  How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time.  Pray sit down.

Gwendolen.  [Still standing up.]  I may call you Cecily, may I not?

Cecily.  With pleasure!

Gwendolen.  And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?

Cecily.  If you wish.

Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think so.

Gwendolen.  Outside the family circle, papa, I am glad to say, is
entirely unknown.  I think that is quite as it should be.  The home seems
to me to be the proper sphere for the man.  And certainly once a man
begins to neglect his domestic duties he becomes painfully effeminate,
does he not?  And I don't like that.  It makes men so very attractive.
Cecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at.

Gwendolen.  [After examining Cecily carefully through a lorgnette.]  You
are here on a short visit, I suppose.

Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here.

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Really?  Your mother, no doubt, or some female
relative of advanced years, resides here also?

Cecily.  Oh no!  I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.

Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me.

Gwendolen.  Your guardian?

Cecily.  Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.

Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound to state that now
that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a
wish you were--well, just a little older than you seem to be--and not
quite so very alluring in appearance.  In fact, if I may speak candidly--

Cecily.  Pray do!  I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to
say, one should always be quite candid.

Gwendolen.  Well, to speak with perfect candour, Cecily, I wish that you
were fully forty-two, and more than usually plain for your age.  Ernest
has a strong upright nature.  He is the very soul of truth and honour.
Disloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.  But even men of
the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the
influence of the physical charms of others.  Modern, no less than Ancient
History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to.
If it were not so, indeed, History would be quite unreadable.

Cecily.  I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?

Gwendolen.  Yes.

Cecily.  Oh, but it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is my guardian.  It is
his brother--his elder brother.

Gwendolen.  [Sitting down again.]  Ernest never mentioned to me that he
had a brother.

Cecily.  I am sorry to say they have not been on good terms for a long
time.

Gwendolen.  Ah! that accounts for it.  And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother.  The subject seems distasteful
to most men.  Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind.  I was growing
almost anxious.  It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across
a friendship like ours, would it not?  Of course you are quite, quite
sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?

Cecily.  Quite sure.  [A pause.]  In fact, I am going to be his.

Gwendolen.  [Inquiringly.]  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  [Rather shy and confidingly.]  Dearest Gwendolen, there is no
reason why I should make a secret of it to you.  Our little county
newspaper is sure to chronicle the fact next week.  Mr. Ernest Worthing
and I are engaged to be married.

Gwendolen.  [Quite politely, rising.]  My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error.  Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.  The
announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest.

Cecily.  [Very politely, rising.]  I am afraid you must be under some
misconception.  Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago.  [Shows
diary.]

Gwendolen.  [Examines diary through her lorgnettte carefully.]  It is
certainly very curious, for he asked me to be his wife yesterday
afternoon at 5.30.  If you would care to verify the incident, pray do so.
[Produces diary of her own.]  I never travel without my diary.  One
should always have something sensational to read in the train.  I am so
sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I
have the prior claim.

Cecily.  It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen,
if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to
point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his
mind.

Gwendolen.  [Meditatively.]  If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once,
and with a firm hand.

Cecily.  [Thoughtfully and sadly.]  Whatever unfortunate entanglement my
dear boy may have got into, I will never reproach him with it after we
are married.

Gwendolen.  Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?  You
are presumptuous.  On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind.  It becomes a pleasure.

Cecily.  Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an
engagement?  How dare you?  This is no time for wearing the shallow mask
of manners.  When I see a spade I call it a spade.

Gwendolen.  [Satirically.]  I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade.  It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different.

[Enter Merriman, followed by the footman.  He carries a salver, table
cloth, and plate stand.  Cecily is about to retort.  The presence of the
servants exercises a restraining influence, under which both girls
chafe.]

Merriman.  Shall I lay tea here as usual, Miss?

Cecily.  [Sternly, in a calm voice.]  Yes, as usual.  [Merriman begins to
clear table and lay cloth.  A long pause.  Cecily and Gwendolen glare at
each other.]

Gwendolen.  Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss
Cardew?

Cecily.  Oh! yes! a great many.  From the top of one of the hills quite
close one can see five counties.

Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds.

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  I suppose that is why you live in town?  [Gwendolen
bites her lip, and beats her foot nervously with her parasol.]

Gwendolen.  [Looking round.]  Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss
Cardew.

Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax.

Gwendolen.  I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.

Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London.

Gwendolen.  Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist
in the country, if anybody who is anybody does.  The country always bores
me to death.

Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.

Cecily.  [Cuts a very large slice of cake, and puts it on the tray.]  Hand
that to Miss Fairfax.

[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far.

Cecily.  [Rising.]  To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the
machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not
go.

Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right.

Cecily.  It seems to me, Miss Fairfax, that I am trespassing on your
valuable time.  No doubt you have many other calls of a similar character
to make in the neighbourhood.

[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing.

Gwendolen.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  This is Uncle Jack.

Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest.

Algernon.  [Goes straight over to Cecily without noticing any one else.]
My own love!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Cecily.  [Drawing back.]  A moment, Ernest!  May I ask you--are you
engaged to be married to this young lady?

Algernon.  [Looking round.]  To what young lady?  Good heavens!
Gwendolen!

Cecily.  Yes! to good heavens, Gwendolen, I mean to Gwendolen.

Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may.
[Algernon kisses her.]

Gwendolen.  I felt there was some slight error, Miss Cardew.  The
gentleman who is now embracing you is my cousin, Mr. Algernon Moncrieff.

Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it.

Cecily.  Oh!

Gwendolen.  Is your name really John?

Jack.  [Standing rather proudly.]  I could deny it if I liked.  I could
deny anything if I liked.  But my name certainly is John.  It has been
John for years.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us.

Gwendolen.  My poor wounded Cecily!

Cecily.  My sweet wronged Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  [Slowly and seriously.]  You will call me sister, will you
not?  [They embrace.  Jack and Algernon groan and walk up and down.]

Cecily.  [Rather brightly.]  There is just one question I would like to
be allowed to ask my guardian.

Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present.

Jack.  [Slowly and hesitatingly.]  Gwendolen--Cecily--it is very painful
for me to be forced to speak the truth.  It is the first time in my life
that I have ever been reduced to such a painful position, and I am really
quite inexperienced in doing anything of the kind.  However, I will tell
you quite frankly that I have no brother Ernest.  I have no brother at
all.  I never had a brother in my life, and I certainly have not the
smallest intention of ever having one in the future.

Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of any kind.

Gwendolen.  I am afraid it is quite clear, Cecily, that neither of us is
engaged to be married to any one.

Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there.

Cecily.  No, men are so cowardly, aren't they?

[They retire into the house with scornful looks.]

Jack.  This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I
suppose?

Algernon.  Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is.  The most
wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.

Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.

Algernon.  That is absurd.  One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one
chooses.  Every serious Bunburyist knows that.

Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about Bunburying.
What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea.
About everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature.

Jack.  Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this
wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded.  You
won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to
do, dear Algy.  And a very good thing too.

Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing either.

Jack.  As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your
taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.

Algernon.  I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a
brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax.
To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.

Jack.  I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all.  I love her.

Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her.

Jack.  There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.

Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united.

Jack.  Well, that is no business of yours.

Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.

Jack.  How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this
horrible trouble, I can't make out.  You seem to me to be perfectly
heartless.

Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them.

Jack.  I say it's perfectly heartless your eating muffins at all, under
the circumstances.

Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead.
I don't like tea-cake.

Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden.

Algernon.  But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat
muffins.

Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances.
That is a very different thing.

Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would go.

Algernon.  You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner.
It's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest.

Jack.  My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better.  I
made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself
at 5.30, and I naturally will take the name of Ernest.  Gwendolen would
wish it.  We can't both be christened Ernest.  It's absurd.  Besides, I
have a perfect right to be christened if I like.  There is no evidence at
all that I have ever been christened by anybody.  I should think it
extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble.  It is entirely
different in your case.  You have been christened already.

Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years.

Jack.  Yes, but you have been christened.  That is the important thing.

Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill.

Jack.  Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.

Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things.

Jack.  [Picking up the muffin-dish.]  Oh, that is nonsense; you are
always talking nonsense.

Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't.
There are only two left.  [Takes them.]  I told you I was particularly
fond of muffins.

Jack.  But I hate tea-cake.

Algernon.  Why on earth then do you allow tea-cake to be served up for
your guests?  What ideas you have of hospitality!

Jack.  Algernon!  I have already told you to go.  I don't want you here.
Why don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House.

[Gwendolen and Cecily are at the window, looking out into the garden.]

Gwendolen.  The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house,
as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some
sense of shame left.

Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentance.

Gwendolen.  [After a pause.]  They don't seem to notice us at all.
Couldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough.

Gwendolen.  They're looking at us.  What effrontery!

Cecily.  They're approaching.  That's very forward of them.

Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence.

Cecily.  Certainly.  It's the only thing to do now.  [Enter Jack followed
by Algernon.  They whistle some dreadful popular air from a British
Opera.]

Gwendolen.  This dignified silence seems to produce an unpleasant effect.

Cecily.  A most distasteful one.

Gwendolen.  But we will not be the first to speak.

Cecily.  Certainly not.

Gwendolen.  Mr. Worthing, I have something very particular to ask you.
Much depends on your reply.

Cecily.  Gwendolen, your common sense is invaluable.  Mr. Moncrieff,
kindly answer me the following question.  Why did you pretend to be my
guardian's brother?

Algernon.  In order that I might have an opportunity of meeting you.

Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

Gwendolen.  Yes, dear, if you can believe him.

Cecily.  I don't.  But that does not affect the wonderful beauty of his
answer.

Gwendolen.  True.  In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity
is the vital thing.  Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me
for pretending to have a brother?  Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

Jack.  Can you doubt it, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  I have the gravest doubts upon the subject.  But I intend to
crush them.  This is not the moment for German scepticism.  [Moving to
Cecily.]  Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially
Mr. Worthing's.  That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it.

Cecily.  I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said.  His voice
alone inspires one with absolute credulity.

Gwendolen.  Then you think we should forgive them?

Cecily.  Yes.  I mean no.

Gwendolen.  True!  I had forgotten.  There are principles at stake that
one cannot surrender.  Which of us should tell them?  The task is not a
pleasant one.

Cecily.  Could we not both speak at the same time?

Gwendolen.  An excellent idea!  I nearly always speak at the same time as
other people.  Will you take the time from me?

Cecily.  Certainly.  [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.]

Gwendolen and Cecily [Speaking together.]  Your Christian names are still
an insuperable barrier.  That is all!

Jack and Algernon [Speaking together.]  Our Christian names!  Is that
all?  But we are going to be christened this afternoon.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  For my sake you are prepared to do this terrible
thing?

Jack.  I am.

Cecily.  [To Algernon.]  To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

Algernon.  I am!

Gwendolen.  How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!  Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us.

Jack.  We are.  [Clasps hands with Algernon.]

Cecily.  They have moments of physical courage of which we women know
absolutely nothing.

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma.

Lady Bracknell.  Come here.  Sit down.  Sit down immediately.  Hesitation
of any kind is a sign of mental decay in the young, of physical weakness
in the old.  [Turns to Jack.]  Apprised, sir, of my daughter's sudden
flight by her trusty maid, whose confidence I purchased by means of a
small coin, I followed her at once by a luggage train.  Her unhappy
father is, I am glad to say, under the impression that she is attending a
more than usually lengthy lecture by the University Extension Scheme on
the Influence of a permanent income on Thought.  I do not propose to
undeceive him.  Indeed I have never undeceived him on any question.  I
would consider it wrong.  But of course, you will clearly understand that
all communication between yourself and my daughter must cease immediately
from this moment.  On this point, as indeed on all points, I am firm.

Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid
friend Mr. Bunbury resides?

Algernon.  [Stammering.]  Oh!  No!  Bunbury doesn't live here.  Bunbury
is somewhere else at present.  In fact, Bunbury is dead.

Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden.

Algernon.  [Airily.]  Oh!  I killed Bunbury this afternoon.  I mean poor
Bunbury died this afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded.

Lady Bracknell.  Exploded!  Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage?
I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation.  If
so, he is well punished for his morbidity.

Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
died.

Lady Bracknell.  He seems to have had great confidence in the opinion of
his physicians.  I am glad, however, that he made up his mind at the last
to some definite course of action, and acted under proper medical advice.
And now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr.
Worthing, who is that young person whose hand my nephew Algernon is now
holding in what seems to me a peculiarly unnecessary manner?

Jack.  That lady is Miss Cecily Cardew, my ward.  [Lady Bracknell bows
coldly to Cecily.]

Algernon.  I am engaged to be married to Cecily, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [With a shiver, crossing to the sofa and sitting down.]
I do not know whether there is anything peculiarly exciting in the air of
this particular part of Hertfordshire, but the number of engagements that
go on seems to me considerably above the proper average that statistics
have laid down for our guidance.  I think some preliminary inquiry on my
part would not be out of place.  Mr. Worthing, is Miss Cardew at all
connected with any of the larger railway stations in London?  I merely
desire information.  Until yesterday I had no idea that there were any
families or persons whose origin was a Terminus.  [Jack looks perfectly
furious, but restrains himself.]

Jack.  [In a clear, cold voice.]  Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of
the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of 149 Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park,
Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.

Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  [Grimly.]  I have known strange errors in that
publication.

Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
Markby.

Lady Bracknell.  Markby, Markby, and Markby?  A firm of the very highest
position in their profession.  Indeed I am told that one of the Mr.
Markby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied.

Jack.  [Very irritably.]  How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell!  I
have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of
Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination,
confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.

Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

Jack.  Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.  That
is all.  Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.  So pleased to have seen you.

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down again.]  A moment, Mr. Worthing.  A
hundred and thirty thousand pounds!  And in the Funds!  Miss Cardew seems
to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her.  Few girls of
the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities
that last, and improve with time.  We live, I regret to say, in an age of
surfaces.  [To Cecily.]  Come over here, dear.  [Cecily goes across.]
Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as
Nature might have left it.  But we can soon alter all that.  A thoroughly
experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very
brief space of time.  I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing,
and after three months her own husband did not know her.

Jack.  And after six months nobody knew her.

Lady Bracknell.  [Glares at Jack for a few moments.  Then bends, with a
practised smile, to Cecily.]  Kindly turn round, sweet child.  [Cecily
turns completely round.]  No, the side view is what I want.  [Cecily
presents her profile.]  Yes, quite as I expected.  There are distinct
social possibilities in your profile.  The two weak points in our age are
its want of principle and its want of profile.  The chin a little higher,
dear.  Style largely depends on the way the chin is worn.  They are worn
very high, just at present.  Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta!

Lady Bracknell.  There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew's
profile.

Algernon.  Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world.  And I don't care twopence about social possibilities.

Lady Bracknell.  Never speak disrespectfully of Society, Algernon.  Only
people who can't get into it do that.  [To Cecily.]  Dear child, of
course you know that Algernon has nothing but his debts to depend upon.
But I do not approve of mercenary marriages.  When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.  But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way.  Well, I suppose I must give my
consent.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  Cecily, you may kiss me!

Cecily.  [Kisses her.]  Thank you, Lady Bracknell.

Lady Bracknell.  You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the future.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  The marriage, I think, had better take place quite soon.

Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta.

Lady Bracknell.  To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements.  They give people the opportunity of finding out each
other's character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.

Jack.  I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this
engagement is quite out of the question.  I am Miss Cardew's guardian,
and she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age.  That
consent I absolutely decline to give.

Lady Bracknell.  Upon what grounds may I ask?  Algernon is an extremely,
I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man.  He has nothing,
but he looks everything.  What more can one desire?

Jack.  It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady
Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at
all of his moral character.  I suspect him of being untruthful.  [Algernon
and Cecily look at him in indignant amazement.]

Lady Bracknell.  Untruthful!  My nephew Algernon?  Impossible!  He is an
Oxonian.

Jack.  I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter.  This
afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important question
of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the false
pretence of being my brother.  Under an assumed name he drank, I've just
been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier-Jouet,
Brut, '89; wine I was specially reserving for myself.  Continuing his
disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in
alienating the affections of my only ward.  He subsequently stayed to
tea, and devoured every single muffin.  And what makes his conduct all
the more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first
that I have no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don't
intend to have a brother, not even of any kind.  I distinctly told him so
myself yesterday afternoon.

Lady Bracknell.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I have
decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you.

Jack.  That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell.  My own decision,
however, is unalterable.  I decline to give my consent.

Lady Bracknell.  [To Cecily.]  Come here, sweet child.  [Cecily goes
over.]  How old are you, dear?

Cecily.  Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty
when I go to evening parties.

Lady Bracknell.  You are perfectly right in making some slight
alteration.  Indeed, no woman should ever be quite accurate about her
age.  It looks so calculating . . . [In a meditative manner.]  Eighteen,
but admitting to twenty at evening parties.  Well, it will not be very
long before you are of age and free from the restraints of tutelage.  So
I don't think your guardian's consent is, after all, a matter of any
importance.

Jack.  Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it
is only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather's
will Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five.

Lady Bracknell.  That does not seem to me to be a grave objection.  Thirty-
five is a very attractive age.  London society is full of women of the
very highest birth who have, of their own free choice, remained thirty-
five for years.  Lady Dumbleton is an instance in point.  To my own
knowledge she has been thirty-five ever since she arrived at the age of
forty, which was many years ago now.  I see no reason why our dear Cecily
should not be even still more attractive at the age you mention than she
is at present.  There will be a large accumulation of property.

Cecily.  Algy, could you wait for me till I was thirty-five?

Algernon.  Of course I could, Cecily.  You know I could.

Cecily.  Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn't wait all that time.
I hate waiting even five minutes for anybody.  It always makes me rather
cross.  I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in
others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.

Algernon.  Then what is to be done, Cecily?

Cecily.  I don't know, Mr. Moncrieff.

Lady Bracknell.  My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively
that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five--a remark which I am bound
to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature--I would beg of
you to reconsider your decision.

Jack.  But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own
hands.  The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most
gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.

Lady Bracknell.  [Rising and drawing herself up.]  You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question.

Jack.  Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward
to.

Lady Bracknell.  That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen.
Algernon, of course, can choose for himself.  [Pulls out her watch.]
Come, dear, [Gwendolen rises] we have already missed five, if not six,
trains.  To miss any more might expose us to comment on the platform.

[Enter Dr. Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  Everything is quite ready for the christenings.

Lady Bracknell.  The christenings, sir!  Is not that somewhat premature?

Chasuble.  [Looking rather puzzled, and pointing to Jack and Algernon.]
Both these gentlemen have expressed a desire for immediate baptism.

Lady Bracknell.  At their age?  The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.  I will not hear of such excesses.
Lord Bracknell would be highly displeased if he learned that that was the
way in which you wasted your time and money.

Chasuble.  Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings
at all this afternoon?

Jack.  I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much
practical value to either of us, Dr. Chasuble.

Chasuble.  I am grieved to hear such sentiments from you, Mr. Worthing.
They savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have
completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.  However, as your
present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once.  Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry.

Lady Bracknell.  [Starting.]  Miss Prism!  Did I hear you mention a Miss
Prism?

Chasuble.  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I am on my way to join her.

Lady Bracknell.  Pray allow me to detain you for a moment.  This matter
may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.  Is
this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with
education?

Chasuble.  [Somewhat indignantly.]  She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability.

Lady Bracknell.  It is obviously the same person.  May I ask what
position she holds in your household?

Chasuble.  [Severely.]  I am a celibate, madam.

Jack.  [Interposing.]  Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companion.

Lady Bracknell.  In spite of what I hear of her, I must see her at once.
Let her be sent for.

Chasuble.  [Looking off.]  She approaches; she is nigh.

[Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.]

Miss Prism.  I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.  I
have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters.  [Catches
sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.  Miss
Prism grows pale and quails.  She looks anxiously round as if desirous to
escape.]

Lady Bracknell.  [In a severe, judicial voice.]  Prism!  [Miss Prism bows
her head in shame.]  Come here, Prism!  [Miss Prism approaches in a
humble manner.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [General consternation.  The
Canon starts back in horror.  Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to
shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public
scandal.]  Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell's
house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator
that contained a baby of the male sex.  You never returned.  A few weeks
later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police,
the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater.  It contained the manuscript of a
three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.  [Miss
Prism starts in involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there!
[Every one looks at Miss Prism.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [A pause.]

Miss Prism.  Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.  I
only wish I did.  The plain facts of the case are these.  On the morning
of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I
prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.  I had also
with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to
place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my
few unoccupied hours.  In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I
never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette,
and placed the baby in the hand-bag.

Jack.  [Who has been listening attentively.]  But where did you deposit
the hand-bag?

Miss Prism.  Do not ask me, Mr. Worthing.

Jack.  Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.  I
insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that
infant.

Miss Prism.  I left it in the cloak-room of one of the larger railway
stations in London.

Jack.  What railway station?

Miss Prism.  [Quite crushed.]  Victoria.  The Brighton line.  [Sinks into
a chair.]

Jack.  I must retire to my room for a moment.  Gwendolen, wait here for
me.

Gwendolen.  If you are not too long, I will wait here for you all my
life.  [Exit Jack in great excitement.]

Chasuble.  What do you think this means, Lady Bracknell?

Lady Bracknell.  I dare not even suspect, Dr. Chasuble.  I need hardly
tell you that in families of high position strange coincidences are not
supposed to occur.  They are hardly considered the thing.

[Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.  Every
one looks up.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated.

Chasuble.  Your guardian has a very emotional nature.

Lady Bracknell.  This noise is extremely unpleasant.  It sounds as if he
was having an argument.  I dislike arguments of any kind.  They are
always vulgar, and often convincing.

Chasuble.  [Looking up.]  It has stopped now.  [The noise is redoubled.]

Lady Bracknell.  I wish he would arrive at some conclusion.

Gwendolen.  This suspense is terrible.  I hope it will last.  [Enter Jack
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

Jack.  [Rushing over to Miss Prism.]  Is this the hand-bag, Miss Prism?
Examine it carefully before you speak.  The happiness of more than one
life depends on your answer.

Miss Prism.  [Calmly.]  It seems to be mine.  Yes, here is the injury it
received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and
happier days.  Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of
a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington.  And
here, on the lock, are my initials.  I had forgotten that in an
extravagant mood I had had them placed there.  The bag is undoubtedly
mine.  I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me.  It has
been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.

Jack.  [In a pathetic voice.]  Miss Prism, more is restored to you than
this hand-bag.  I was the baby you placed in it.

Miss Prism.  [Amazed.]  You?

Jack.  [Embracing her.]  Yes . . . mother!

Miss Prism.  [Recoiling in indignant astonishment.]  Mr. Worthing!  I am
unmarried!

Jack.  Unmarried!  I do not deny that is a serious blow.  But after all,
who has the right to cast a stone against one who has suffered?  Cannot
repentance wipe out an act of folly?  Why should there be one law for
men, and another for women?  Mother, I forgive you.  [Tries to embrace
her again.]

Miss Prism.  [Still more indignant.]  Mr. Worthing, there is some error.
[Pointing to Lady Bracknell.]  There is the lady who can tell you who you
really are.

Jack.  [After a pause.]  Lady Bracknell, I hate to seem inquisitive, but
would you kindly inform me who I am?

Lady Bracknell.  I am afraid that the news I have to give you will not
altogether please you.  You are the son of my poor sister, Mrs.
Moncrieff, and consequently Algernon's elder brother.

Jack.  Algy's elder brother!  Then I have a brother after all.  I knew I
had a brother!  I always said I had a brother!  Cecily,--how could you
have ever doubted that I had a brother?  [Seizes hold of Algernon.]  Dr.
Chasuble, my unfortunate brother.  Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother.
Gwendolen, my unfortunate brother.  Algy, you young scoundrel, you will
have to treat me with more respect in the future.  You have never behaved
to me like a brother in all your life.

Algernon.  Well, not till to-day, old boy, I admit.  I did my best,
however, though I was out of practice.

[Shakes hands.]

Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  My own!  But what own are you?  What is your
Christian name, now that you have become some one else?

Jack.  Good heavens! . . . I had quite forgotten that point.  Your
decision on the subject of my name is irrevocable, I suppose?

Gwendolen.  I never change, except in my affections.

Cecily.  What a noble nature you have, Gwendolen!

Jack.  Then the question had better be cleared up at once.  Aunt Augusta,
a moment.  At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I
been christened already?

Lady Bracknell.  Every luxury that money could buy, including
christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.

Jack.  Then I was christened!  That is settled.  Now, what name was I
given?  Let me know the worst.

Lady Bracknell.  Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after
your father.

Jack.  [Irritably.]  Yes, but what was my father's Christian name?

Lady Bracknell.  [Meditatively.]  I cannot at the present moment recall
what the General's Christian name was.  But I have no doubt he had one.
He was eccentric, I admit.  But only in later years.  And that was the
result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other
things of that kind.

Jack.  Algy!  Can't you recollect what our father's Christian name was?

Algernon.  My dear boy, we were never even on speaking terms.  He died
before I was a year old.

Jack.  His name would appear in the Army Lists of the period, I suppose,
Aunt Augusta?

Lady Bracknell.  The General was essentially a man of peace, except in
his domestic life.  But I have no doubt his name would appear in any
military directory.

Jack.  The Army Lists of the last forty years are here.  These delightful
records should have been my constant study.  [Rushes to bookcase and
tears the books out.]  M. Generals . . . Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what
ghastly names they have--Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff!  Lieutenant
1840, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, General 1869, Christian
names, Ernest John.  [Puts book very quietly down and speaks quite
calmly.]  I always told you, Gwendolen, my name was Ernest, didn't I?
Well, it is Ernest after all.  I mean it naturally is Ernest.

Lady Bracknell.  Yes, I remember now that the General was called Ernest,
I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name.

Gwendolen.  Ernest!  My own Ernest!  I felt from the first that you could
have no other name!

Jack.  Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly
that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth.  Can you
forgive me?

Gwendolen.  I can.  For I feel that you are sure to change.

Jack.  My own one!

Chasuble.  [To Miss Prism.]  Laetitia!  [Embraces her]

Miss Prism.  [Enthusiastically.]  Frederick!  At last!

Algernon.  Cecily!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Lady Bracknell.  My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of
triviality.

Jack.  On the contrary, Aunt Augusta, I've now realised for the first
time in my life the vital Importance of Being Earnest.


HISTORICAL criticism nowhere occurs as an isolated fact in the
civilisation or literature of any people.  It is part of that complex
working towards freedom which may be described as the revolt against
authority.  It is merely one facet of that speculative spirit of an
innovation, which in the sphere of action produces democracy and
revolution, and in that of thought is the parent of philosophy and
physical science; and its importance as a factor of progress is based not
so much on the results it attains, as on the tone of thought which it
represents, and the method by which it works.

Being thus the resultant of forces essentially revolutionary, it is not
to be found in the ancient world among the material despotisms of Asia or
the stationary civilisation of Egypt.  The clay cylinders of Assyria and
Babylon, the hieroglyphics of the pyramids, form not history but the
material for history.

The Chinese annals, ascending as they do to the barbarous forest life of
the nation, are marked with a soberness of judgment, a freedom from
invention, which is almost unparalleled in the writings of any people;
but the protective spirit which is the characteristic of that people
proved as fatal to their literature as to their commerce.  Free criticism
is as unknown as free trade.  While as regards the Hindus, their acute,
analytical and logical mind is directed rather to grammar, criticism and
philosophy than to history or chronology.  Indeed, in history their
imagination seems to have run wild, legend and fact are so indissolubly
mingled together that any attempt to separate them seems vain.  If we
except the identification of the Greek Sandracottus with the Indian
Chandragupta, we have really no clue by which we can test the truth of
their writings or examine their method of investigation.

It is among the Hellenic branch of the Indo-Germanic race that history
proper is to be found, as well as the spirit of historical criticism;
among that wonderful offshoot of the primitive Aryans, whom we call by
the name of Greeks and to whom, as has been well said, we owe all that
moves in the world except the blind forces of nature.

For, from the day when they left the chill table-lands of Tibet and
journeyed, a nomad people, to Ægean shores, the characteristic of their
nature has been the search for light, and the spirit of historical
criticism is part of that wonderful Aufklärung or illumination of the
intellect which seems to have burst on the Greek race like a great flood
of light about the sixth century B.C.

_L’esprit d’un siècle ne naît pas et ne meurt pas à jour fixe_, and the
first critic is perhaps as difficult to discover as the first man.  It is
from democracy that the spirit of criticism borrows its intolerance of
dogmatic authority, from physical science the alluring analogies of law
and order, from philosophy the conception of an essential unity
underlying the complex manifestations of phenomena.  It appears first
rather as a changed attitude of mind than as a principle of research, and
its earliest influences are to be found in the sacred writings.

For men begin to doubt in questions of religion first, and then in
matters of more secular interest; and as regards the nature of the spirit
of historical criticism itself in its ultimate development, it is not
confined merely to the empirical method of ascertaining whether an event
happened or not, but is concerned also with the investigation into the
causes of events, the general relations which phenomena of life hold to
one another, and in its ultimate development passes into the wider
question of the philosophy of history.

Now, while the workings of historical criticism in these two spheres of
sacred and uninspired history are essentially manifestations of the same
spirit, yet their methods are so different, the canons of evidence so
entirely separate, and the motives in each case so unconnected, that it
will be necessary for a clear estimation of the progress of Greek
thought, that we should consider these two questions entirely apart from
one another.  I shall then in both cases take the succession of writers
in their chronological order as representing the rational order—not that
the succession of time is always the succession of ideas, or that
dialectics moves ever in the straight line in which Hegel conceives its
advance.  In Greek thought, as elsewhere, there are periods of stagnation
and apparent retrogression, yet their intellectual development, not
merely in the question of historical criticism, but in their art, their
poetry and their philosophy, seems so essentially normal, so free from
all disturbing external influences, so peculiarly rational, that in
following in the footsteps of time we shall really be progressing in the
order sanctioned by reason.

AT an early period in their intellectual development the Greeks reached
that critical point in the history of every civilised nation, when
speculative invades the domain of revealed truth, when the spiritual
ideas of the people can no longer be satisfied by the lower, material
conceptions of their inspired writers, and when men find it impossible to
pour the new wine of free thought into the old bottles of a narrow and a
trammelling creed.

From their Aryan ancestors they had received the fatal legacy of a
mythology stained with immoral and monstrous stories which strove to hide
the rational order of nature in a chaos of miracles, and to mar by
imputed wickedness the perfection of God’s nature—a very shirt of Nessos
in which the Heracles of rationalism barely escaped annihilation.  Now
while undoubtedly the speculations of Thales, and the alluring analogies
of law and order afforded by physical science, were most important forces
in encouraging the rise of the spirit of scepticism, yet it was on its
ethical side that the Greek mythology was chiefly open to attack.

It is difficult to shake the popular belief in miracles, but no man will
admit sin and immorality as attributes of the Ideal he worships; so the
first symptoms of a new order of thought are shown in the passionate
outcries of Xenophanes and Heraclitos against the evil things said by
Homer of the sons of God; and in the story told of Pythagoras, how that
he saw tortured in Hell the ‘two founders of Greek theology,’ we can
recognise the rise of the Aufklärung as clearly as we see the Reformation
foreshadowed in the _Inferno_ of Dante.

Any honest belief, then, in the plain truth of these stories soon
succumbed before the destructive effects of the _a priori_ ethical
criticism of this school; but the orthodox party, as is its custom, found
immediately a convenient shelter under the ægis of the doctrine of
metaphors and concealed meanings.

To this allegorical school the tale of the fight around the walls of Troy
was a mystery, behind which, as behind a veil, were hidden certain moral
and physical truths.  The contest between Athena and Ares was that
eternal contest between rational thought and the brute force of
ignorance; the arrows which rattled in the quiver of the ‘Far Darter’
were no longer the instruments of vengeance shot from the golden bow of
the child of God, but the common rays of the sun, which was itself
nothing but a mere inert mass of burning metal.

Modern investigation, with the ruthlessness of Philistine analysis, has
ultimately brought Helen of Troy down to a symbol of the dawn.  There
were Philistines among the Greeks also who saw in the _ἄναξ ἀδρῶν_ a mere
metaphor for atmospheric power.

Now while this tendency to look for metaphors and hidden meanings must be
ranked as one of the germs of historical criticism, yet it was
essentially unscientific.  Its inherent weakness is clearly pointed out
by Plato, who showed that while this theory will no doubt explain many of
the current legends, yet, if it is to be appealed to at all, it must be
as a universal principle; a position he is by no means prepared to admit.

Like many other great principles it suffered from its disciples, and
furnished its own refutation when the web of Penelope was analysed into a
metaphor of the rules of formal logic, the warp representing the
premises, and the woof the conclusion.

Rejecting, then, the allegorical interpretation of the sacred writings as
an essentially dangerous method, proving either too much or too little,
Plato himself returns to the earlier mode of attack, and re-writes
history with a didactic purpose, laying down certain ethical canons of
historical criticism.  God is good; God is just; God is true; God is
without the common passions of men.  These are the tests to which we are
to bring the stories of the Greek religion.

‘God predestines no men to ruin, nor sends destruction on innocent
cities; He never walks the earth in strange disguise, nor has to mourn
for the death of any well-beloved son.  Away with the tears for Sarpedon,
the lying dream sent to Agamemnon, and the story of the broken covenant!’
(Plato, _Republic_, Book ii. 380; iii. 388, 391.)

Similar ethical canons are applied to the accounts of the heroes of the
days of old, and by the same _a priori_ principles Achilles is rescued
from the charges of avarice and insolence in a passage which may be
recited as the earliest instance of that ‘whitewashing of great men,’ as
it has been called, which is so popular in our own day, when Catiline and
Clodius are represented as honest and far-seeing politicians, when _eine
edle und gute Natur_ is claimed for Tiberius, and Nero is rescued from
his heritage of infamy as an accomplished _dilettante_ whose moral
aberrations are more than excused by his exquisite artistic sense and
charming tenor voice.

But besides the allegorising principle of interpretation, and the ethical
reconstruction of history, there was a third theory, which may be called
the semi-historical, and which goes by the name of Euhemeros, though he
was by no means the first to propound it.

Appealing to a fictitious monument which he declared that he had
discovered in the island of Panchaia, and which purported to be a column
erected by Zeus, and detailing the incidents of his reign on earth, this
shallow thinker attempted to show that the gods and heroes of ancient
Greece were ‘mere ordinary mortals, whose achievements had been a good
deal exaggerated and misrepresented,’ and that the proper canon of
historical criticism as regards the treatment of myths was to rationalise
the incredible, and to present the plausible residuum as actual truth.

To him and his school, the centaurs, for instance, those mythical sons of
the storm, strange links between the lives of men and animals, were
merely some youths from the village of Nephele in Thessaly, distinguished
for their sporting tastes; the ‘living harvest of panoplied knights,’
which sprang so mystically from the dragon’s teeth, a body of mercenary
troops supported by the profits on a successful speculation in ivory; and
Actæon, an ordinary master of hounds, who, living before the days of
subscription, was eaten out of house and home by the expenses of his
kennel.

Now, that under the glamour of myth and legend some substratum of
historical fact may lie, is a proposition rendered extremely probable by
the modern investigations into the workings of the mythopœic spirit in
post-Christian times.  Charlemagne and Roland, St. Francis and William
Tell, are none the less real personages because their histories are
filled with much that is fictitious and incredible, but in all cases what
is essentially necessary is some external corroboration, such as is
afforded by the mention of Roland and Roncesvalles in the chronicles of
England, or (in the sphere of Greek legend) by the excavations of
Hissarlik.  But to rob a mythical narrative of its kernel of supernatural
elements, and to present the dry husk thus obtained as historical fact,
is, as has been well said, to mistake entirely the true method of
investigation and to identify plausibility with truth.

And as regards the critical point urged by Palaiphatos, Strabo, and
Polybius, that pure invention on Homer’s part is inconceivable, we may
without scruple allow it, for myths, like constitutions, grow gradually,
and are not formed in a day.  But between a poet’s deliberate creation
and historical accuracy there is a wide field of the mythopœic faculty.

This Euhemeristic theory was welcomed as an essentially philosophical and
critical method by the unscientific Romans, to whom it was introduced by
the poet Ennius, that pioneer of cosmopolitan Hellenicism, and it
continued to characterise the tone of ancient thought on the question of
the treatment of mythology till the rise of Christianity, when it was
turned by such writers as Augustine and Minucius Felix into a formidable
weapon of attack on Paganism.  It was then abandoned by all those who
still bent the knee to Athena or to Zeus, and a general return, aided by
the philosophic mystics of Alexandria, to the allegorising principle of
interpretation took place, as the only means of saving the deities of
Olympus from the Titan assaults of the new Galilean God.  In what vain
defence, the statue of Mary set in the heart of the Pantheon can best
tell us.

Religions, however, may be absorbed, but they never are disproved, and
the stories of the Greek mythology, spiritualised by the purifying
influence of Christianity, reappear in many of the southern parts of
Europe in our own day.  The old fable that the Greek gods took service
with the new religion under assumed names has more truth in it than the
many care to discover.

Having now traced the progress of historical criticism in the special
treatment of myth and legend, I shall proceed to investigate the form in
which the same spirit manifested itself as regards what one may term
secular history and secular historians.  The field traversed will be
found to be in some respects the same, but the mental attitude, the
spirit, the motive of investigation are all changed.

There were heroes before the son of Atreus and historians before
Herodotus, yet the latter is rightly hailed as the father of history, for
in him we discover not merely the empirical connection of cause and
effect, but that constant reference to Laws, which is the characteristic
of the historian proper.

For all history must be essentially universal; not in the sense of
comprising all the synchronous events of the past time, but through the
universality of the principles employed.  And the great conceptions which
unify the work of Herodotus are such as even modern thought has not yet
rejected.  The immediate government of the world by God, the nemesis and
punishment which sin and pride invariably bring with them, the revealing
of God’s purpose to His people by signs and omens, by miracles and by
prophecy; these are to Herodotus the laws which govern the phenomena of
history.  He is essentially the type of supernatural historian; his eyes
are ever strained to discern the Spirit of God moving over the face of
the waters of life; he is more concerned with final than with efficient
causes.

Yet we can discern in him the rise of that _historic sense_ which is the
rational antecedent of the science of historical criticism, the _φυσικὸν
κριτήριον_, to use the words of a Greek writer, as opposed to that which
comes either _τέχνη_ or _διδαχῇ_.

He has passed through the valley of faith and has caught a glimpse of the
sunlit heights of Reason; but like all those who, while accepting the
supernatural, yet attempt to apply the canons of rationalism, he is
essentially inconsistent.  For the better apprehension of the character
of this historic sense in Herodotus it will be necessary to examine at
some length the various forms of criticism in which it manifests itself.

Such fabulous stories as that of the Phoenix, of the goat-footed men, of
the headless beings with eyes in their breasts, of the men who slept six
months in the year (_τοῦτο οὐκ ἐνδέχομαι ηὴν ἀρχήν_), of the wer-wolf of
the Neuri, and the like, are entirely rejected by him as being opposed to
the ordinary experience of life, and to those natural laws whose
universal influence the early Greek physical philosophers had already
made known to the world of thought.  Other legends, such as the suckling
of Cyrus by a bitch, or the feather-rain of northern Europe, are
rationalised and explained into a woman’s name and a fall of snow.  The
supernatural origin of the Scythian nation, from the union of Hercules
and the monstrous Echidna, is set aside by him for the more probable
account that they were a nomad tribe driven by the Massagetæ from Asia;
and he appeals to the local names of their country as proof of the fact
that the Kimmerians were the original possessors.

But in the case of Herodotus it will be more instructive to pass on from
points like these to those questions of general probability, the true
apprehension of which depends rather on a certain quality of mind than on
any possibility of formulated rules, questions which form no unimportant
part of scientific history; for it must be remembered always that the
canons of historical criticism are essentially different from those of
judicial evidence, for they cannot, like the latter, be made plain to
every ordinary mind, but appeal to a certain historical faculty founded
on the experience of life.  Besides, the rules for the reception of
evidence in courts of law are purely stationary, while the science of
historical probability is essentially progressive, and changes with the
advancing spirit of each age.

Now, of all the speculative canons of historical criticism, none is more
important than that which rests on psychological probability.

Arguing from his knowledge of human nature, Herodotus rejects the
presence of Helen within the walls of Troy.  Had she been there, he says,
Priam and his kinsmen would never have been so mad (_φρενοβλαβεῖς_) as
not to give her up, when they and their children and their city were in
such peril (ii. 118); and as regards the authority of Homer, some
incidental passages in his poem show that he knew of Helen’s sojourn in
Egypt during the siege, but selected the other story as being a more
suitable motive for an epic.  Similarly he does not believe that the
Alcmæonidæ family, a family who had always been the haters of tyranny
(_μισοτύραννοι_), and to whom, even more than to Harmodios and
Aristogeiton, Athens owed its liberty, would ever have been so
treacherous as to hold up a shield after the battle of Marathon as a
signal for the Persian host to fall on the city.  A shield, he
acknowledges, was held up, but it could not possibly have been done by
such friends of liberty as the house of Alcmæon; nor will he believe that
a great king like Rhampsinitus would have sent his daughter _κατίσαι ἐπ’
οἰκήματος_.

Elsewhere he argues from more general considerations of probability; a
Greek courtesan like Rhodopis would hardly have been rich enough to build
a pyramid, and, besides, on chronological grounds the story is impossible
(ii. 134).

In another passage (ii. 63), after giving an account of the forcible
entry of the priests of Ares into the chapel of the god’s mother, which
seems to have been a sort of religious faction fight where sticks were
freely used (_μάχη ξύλοισι καρτερή_), ‘I feel sure,’ he says, ‘that many
of them died from getting their heads broken, notwithstanding the
assertions of the Egyptian priests to the contrary.’  There is also
something charmingly naïve in the account he gives of the celebrated
Greek swimmer who dived a distance of eighty stadia to give his
countrymen warning of the Persian advance.  ‘If, however,’ he says, ‘I
may offer an opinion on the subject, I would say that he came in a boat.’

There is, of course, something a little trivial in some of the instances
I have quoted; but in a writer like Herodotus, who stands on the
borderland between faith and rationalism, one likes to note even the most
minute instances of the rise of the critical and sceptical spirit of
inquiry.

How really strange, at base, it was with him may, I think, be shown by a
reference to those passages where he applies rationalistic tests to
matters connected with religion.  He nowhere, indeed, grapples with the
moral and scientific difficulties of the Greek Bible; and where he
rejects as incredible the marvellous achievements of Hercules in Egypt,
he does so on the express grounds that he had not yet been received among
the gods, and so was still subject to the ordinary conditions of mortal
life (_ἔτι ἄνθρωπον ἐόντα_).

Even within these limits, however, his religious conscience seems to have
been troubled at such daring rationalism, and the passage (ii. 45)
concludes with a pious hope that God will pardon him for having gone so
far, the great rationalistic passage being, of course, that in which he
rejects the mythical account of the foundation of Dodona.  ‘How can a
dove speak with a human voice?’ he asks, and rationalises the bird into a
foreign princess.

Similarly he seems more inclined to believe that the great storm at the
beginning of the Persian War ceased from ordinary atmospheric causes, and
not in consequence of the incantations of the _Magians_.  He calls
Melampos, whom the majority of the Greeks looked on as an inspired
prophet, ‘a clever man who had acquired for himself the art of prophecy’;
and as regards the miracle told of the Æginetan statues of the primeval
deities of Damia and Auxesia, that they fell on their knees when the
sacrilegious Athenians strove to carry them off, ‘any one may believe
it,’ he says, ‘who likes, but as for myself, I place no credence in the
tale.’

So much then for the rationalistic spirit of historical criticism, as far
as it appears explicitly in the works of this great and philosophic
writer; but for an adequate appreciation of his position we must also
note how conscious he was of the value of documentary evidence, of the
use of inscriptions, of the importance of the poets as throwing light on
manners and customs as well as on historical incidents.  No writer of any
age has more vividly recognised the fact that history is a matter of
evidence, and that it is as necessary for the historian to state his
authority as it is to produce one’s witnesses in a court of law.

While, however, we can discern in Herodotus the rise of an historic
sense, we must not blind ourselves to the large amount of instances where
he receives supernatural influences as part of the ordinary forces of
life.  Compared to Thucydides, who succeeded him in the development of
history, he appears almost like a mediæval writer matched with a modern
rationalist.  For, contemporary though they were, between these two
authors there is an infinite chasm of thought.

The essential difference of their methods may be best illustrated from
those passages where they treat of the same subject.  The execution of
the Spartan heralds, Nicolaos and Aneristos, during the Peloponnesian War
is regarded by Herodotus as one of the most supernatural instances of the
workings of nemesis and the wrath of an outraged hero; while the
lengthened siege and ultimate fall of Troy was brought about by the
avenging hand of God desiring to manifest unto men the mighty penalties
which always follow upon mighty sins.  But Thucydides either sees not, or
desires not to see, in either of these events the finger of Providence,
or the punishment of wicked doers.  The death of the heralds is merely an
Athenian retaliation for similar outrages committed by the opposite side;
the long agony of the ten years’ siege is due merely to the want of a
good commissariat in the Greek army; while the fall of the city is the
result of a united military attack consequent on a good supply of
provisions.

Now, it is to be observed that in this latter passage, as well as
elsewhere, Thucydides is in no sense of the word a sceptic as regards his
attitude towards the truth of these ancient legends.

Agamemnon and Atreus, Theseus and Eurystheus, even Minos, about whom
Herodotus has some doubts, are to him as real personages as Alcibiades or
Gylippus.  The points in his historical criticism of the past are, first,
his rejection of all extra-natural interference, and, secondly, the
attributing to these ancient heroes the motives and modes of thought of
his own day.  The present was to him the key to the explanation of the
past, as it was to the prediction of the future.

Now, as regards his attitude towards the supernatural he is at one with
modern science.  We too know that, just as the primeval coal-beds reveal
to us the traces of rain-drops and other atmospheric phenomena similar to
those of our own day, so, in estimating the history of the past, the
introduction of no force must be allowed whose workings we cannot observe
among the phenomena around us.  To lay down canons of ultra-historical
credibility for the explanation of events which happen to have preceded
us by a few thousand years, is as thoroughly unscientific as it is to
intermingle preternatural in geological theories.

Whatever the canons of art may be, no difficulty in history is so great
as to warrant the introduction of a spirit of spirit _θεὸς ἀπὸ μηχανῆς_,
in the sense of a violation of the laws of nature.

Upon the other point, however, Thucydides falls into an anachronism.  To
refuse to allow the workings of chivalrous and self-denying motives among
the knights of the Trojan crusade, because he saw none in the
faction-loving Athenian of his own day, is to show an entire ignorance of
the various characteristics of human nature developing under different
circumstances, and to deny to a primitive chieftain like Agamemnon that
authority founded on opinion, to which we give the name of divine right,
is to fall into an historical error quite as gross as attributing to
Atreus the courting of the populace (_τεθεραπευκότα τὸν δῆμον_) with a
view to the Mycenean throne.

The general method of historical criticism pursued by Thucydides having
been thus indicated, it remains to proceed more into detail as regards
those particular points where he claims for himself a more rational
method of estimating evidence than either the public or his predecessors
possessed.

‘So little pains,’ he remarks, ‘do the vulgar take in the investigation
of truth, satisfied with their preconceived opinions,’ that the majority
of the Greeks believe in a Pitanate cohort of the Spartan army and in a
double vote being the prerogative of the Spartan kings, neither of which
opinions has any foundation in fact.  But the chief point on which he
lays stress as evincing the ‘uncritical way with which men receive
legends, even the legends of their own country,’ is the entire
baselessness of the common Athenian tradition in which Harmodios and
Aristogeiton were represented as the patriotic liberators of Athens from
the Peisistratid tyranny.  So far, he points out, from the love of
freedom being their motive, both of them were influenced by merely
personal considerations, Aristogeiton being jealous of Hipparchos’
attention to Harmodios, then a beautiful boy in the flower of Greek
loveliness, while the latter’s indignation was aroused by an insult
offered to his sister by the prince.

Their motives, then, were personal revenge, while the result of their
conspiracy served only to rivet more tightly the chains of servitude
which bound Athens to the Peisistratid house, for Hipparchos, whom they
killed, was only the tyrant’s younger brother, and not the tyrant
himself.

To prove his theory that Hippias was the elder, he appeals to the
evidence afforded by a public inscription in which his name occurs
immediately after that of his father, a point which he thinks shows that
he was the eldest, and so the heir.  This view he further corroborates by
another inscription, on the altar of Apollo, which mentions the children
of Hippias and not those of his brothers; ‘for it was natural for the
eldest to be married first’; and besides this, on the score of general
probability he points out that, had Hippias been the younger, he would
not have so easily obtained the tyranny on the death of Hipparchos.

Now, what is important in Thucydides, as evinced in the treatment of
legend generally, is not the results he arrived at, but the method by
which he works.  The first great rationalistic historian, he may be said
to have paved the way for all those who followed after him, though it
must always be remembered that, while the total absence in his pages of
all the mystical paraphernalia of the supernatural theory of life is an
advance in the progress of rationalism, and an era in scientific history,
whose importance could never be over-estimated, yet we find along with it
a total absence of any mention of those various social and economical
forces which form such important factors in the evolution of the world,
and to which Herodotus rightly gave great prominence in his immortal
work.  The history of Thucydides is essentially one-sided and incomplete.
The intricate details of sieges and battles, subjects with which the
historian proper has really nothing to do except so far as they may throw
light on the spirit of the age, we would readily exchange for some notice
of the condition of private society in Athens, or the influence and
position of women.

There is an advance in the method of historical criticism; there is an
advance in the conception and motive of history itself; for in Thucydides
we may discern that natural reaction against the intrusion of didactic
and theological considerations into the sphere of the pure intellect, the
spirit of which may be found in the Euripidean treatment of tragedy and
the later schools of art, as well as in the Platonic conception of
science.

History, no doubt, has splendid lessons for our instruction, just as all
good art comes to us as the herald of the noblest truth.  But, to set
before either the painter or the historian the inculcation of moral
lessons as an aim to be consciously pursued, is to miss entirely the true
motive and characteristic both of art and history, which is in the one
case the creation of beauty, in the other the discovery of the laws of
the evolution of progress: _Il ne faut demander de l’Art que l’Art_, _du
passé que le passé_.

Herodotus wrote to illustrate the wonderful ways of Providence and the
nemesis that falls on sin, and his work is a good example of the truth
that nothing can dispense with criticism so much as a moral aim.
Thucydides has no creed to preach, no doctrine to prove.  He analyses the
results which follow inevitably from certain antecedents, in order that
on a recurrence of the same crisis men may know how to act.

His object was to discover the laws of the past so as to serve as a light
to illumine the future.  We must not confuse the recognition of the
utility of history with any ideas of a didactic aim.  Two points more in
Thucydides remain for our consideration: his treatment of the rise of
Greek civilisation, and of the primitive condition of Hellas, as well as
the question how far can he be said really to have recognised the
existence of laws regulating the complex phenomena of life.

THE investigation into the two great problems of the origin of society
and the philosophy of history occupies such an important position in the
evolution of Greek thought that, to obtain any clear view of the workings
of the critical spirit, it will be necessary to trace at some length
their rise and scientific development as evinced not merely in the works
of historians proper, but also in the philosophical treatises of Plato
and Aristotle.  The important position which these two great thinkers
occupy in the progress of historical criticism can hardly be
over-estimated.  I do not mean merely as regards their treatment of the
Greek Bible, and Plato’s endeavours to purge sacred history of its
immorality by the application of ethical canons at the time when
Aristotle was beginning to undermine the basis of miracles by his
scientific conception of law, but with reference to these two wider
questions of the rise of civil institutions and the philosophy of
history.

And first, as regards the current theories of the primitive condition of
society, there was a wide divergence of opinion in Hellenic society, just
as there is now.  For while the majority of the orthodox public, of whom
Hesiod may be taken as the representative, looked back, as a great many
of our own day still do, to a fabulous age of innocent happiness, a
_bell’ età dell’ auro_, where sin and death were unknown and men and
women were like Gods, the foremost men of intellect such as Aristotle and
Plato, Æschylus and many of the other poets {29} saw in primitive man ‘a
few small sparks of humanity preserved on the tops of mountains after
some deluge,’ ‘without an idea of cities, governments or legislation,’
‘living the lives of wild beasts in sunless caves,’ ‘their only law being
the survival of the fittest.’

And this, too, was the opinion of Thucydides, whose _Archæologia_ as it
is contains a most valuable disquisition on the early condition of
Hellas, which it will be necessary to examine at some length.

Now, as regards the means employed generally by Thucydides for the
elucidation of ancient history, I have already pointed out how that,
while acknowledging that ‘it is the tendency of every poet to exaggerate,
as it is of every chronicler to seek to be attractive at the expense of
truth,’ he yet assumes in the thoroughly euhemeristic way, that under the
veil of myth and legend there does yet exist a rational basis of fact
discoverable by the method of rejecting all supernatural interference as
well as any extraordinary motives influencing the actors.  It is in
complete accordance with this spirit that he appeals, for instance, to
the Homeric epithet of _ἀφνειός_, as applied to Corinth, as a proof of
the early commercial prosperity of that city; to the fact of the generic
name _Hellenes_ not occurring in the _Iliad_ as a corroboration of his
theory of the essentially disunited character of the primitive Greek
tribes; and he argues from the line ‘O’er many islands and all Argos
ruled,’ as applied to Agamemnon, that his forces must have been partially
naval, ‘for Agamemnon’s was a continental power, and he could not have
been master of any but the adjacent islands, and these would not be many
but through the possession of a fleet.’

Anticipating in some measure the comparative method of research, he
argues from the fact of the more barbarous Greek tribes, such as the
Ætolians and Acarnanians, still carrying arms in his own day, that this
custom was the case originally over the whole country.  ‘The fact,’ he
says, ‘that the people in these parts of Hellas are still living in the
old way points to a time when the same mode of life was equally common to
all.’  Similarly, in another passage, he shows how a corroboration of his
theory of the respectable character of piracy in ancient days is afforded
by ‘the honour with which some of the inhabitants of the continent still
regard a successful marauder,’ as well as by the fact that the question,
‘Are you a pirate?’ is a common feature of primitive society as shown in
the poets; and finally, after observing how the old Greek custom of
wearing belts in gymnastic contests still survived among the more
uncivilised Asiatic tribes, he observes that there are many other points
in which a likeness may be shown between the life of the primitive
Hellenes and that of the barbarians to-day.’

As regards the evidence afforded by ancient remains, while adducing as a
proof of the insecure character of early Greek society the fact of their
cities {31} being always built at some distance from the sea, yet he is
careful to warn us, and the caution ought to be borne in mind by all
archæologists, that we have no right to conclude from the scanty remains
of any city that its legendary greatness in primitive times was a mere
exaggeration.  ‘We are not justified,’ he says, ‘in rejecting the
tradition of the magnitude of the Trojan armament, because Mycenæ and the
other towns of that age seem to us small and insignificant.  For, if
Lacedæmon was to become desolate, any antiquarian judging merely from its
ruins would be inclined to regard the tale of the Spartan hegemony as an
idle myth; for the city is a mere collection of villages after the old
fashion of Hellas, and has none of those splendid public buildings and
temples which characterise Athens, and whose remains, in the case of the
latter city, would be so marvellous as to lead the superficial observer
into an exaggerated estimate of the Athenian power.’  Nothing can be more
scientific than the archæological canons laid down, whose truth is
strikingly illustrated to any one who has compared the waste fields of
the Eurotas plain with the lordly monuments of the Athenian acropolis.
{32}

On the other hand, Thucydides is quite conscious of the value of the
positive evidence afforded by archæological remains.  He appeals, for
instance, to the character of the armour found in the Delian tombs and
the peculiar mode of sepulture, as corroboration of his theory of the
predominance of the Carian element among the primitive islanders, and to
the concentration of all the temples either in the Acropolis, or in its
immediate vicinity, to the name of _ἄστυ_ by which it was still known,
and to the extraordinary sanctity of the spring of water there, as proof
that the primitive city was originally confined to the citadel, and the
district immediately beneath it (ii. 16).  And lastly, in the very
opening of his history, anticipating one of the most scientific of modern
methods, he points out how in early states of civilisation immense
fertility of the soil tends to favour the personal aggrandisement of
individuals, and so to stop the normal progress of the country through
‘the rise of factions, that endless source of ruin’; and also by the
allurements it offers to a foreign invader, to necessitate a continual
change of population, one immigration following on another.  He
exemplifies his theory by pointing to the endless political revolutions
that characterised Arcadia, Thessaly and Boeotia, the three richest spots
in Greece, as well as by the negative instance of the undisturbed state
in primitive time of Attica, which was always remarkable for the dryness
and poverty of its soil.

Now, while undoubtedly in these passages we may recognise the first
anticipation of many of the most modern principles of research, we must
remember how essentially limited is the range of the _archæologia_, and
how no theory at all is offered on the wider questions of the general
conditions of the rise and progress of humanity, a problem which is first
scientifically discussed in the _Republic_ of Plato.

And at the outset it must be premised that, while the study of primitive
man is an essentially inductive science, resting rather on the
accumulation of evidence than on speculation, among the Greeks it was
prosecuted rather on deductive principles.  Thucydides did, indeed, avail
himself of the opportunities afforded by the unequal development of
civilisation in his own day in Greece, and in the places I have pointed
out seems to have anticipated the comparative method.  But we do not find
later writers availing themselves of the wonderfully accurate and
picturesque accounts given by Herodotus of the customs of savage tribes.
To take one instance, which bears a good deal on modern questions, we
find in the works of this great traveller the gradual and progressive
steps in the development of the family life clearly manifested in the
mere gregarious herding together of the Agathyrsi, their primitive
kinsmanship through women in common, and the rise of a feeling of
paternity from a state of polyandry.  This tribe stood at that time on
that borderland between umbilical relationship and the family which has
been such a difficult point for modern anthropologists to find.

The ancient authors, however, are unanimous in insisting that the family
is the ultimate unit of society, though, as I have said, an inductive
study of primitive races, or even the accounts given of them by
Herodotus, would have shown them that the _νεοττιὰ ἴδια_ of a personal
household, to use Plato’s expression, is really a most complex notion
appearing always in a late stage of civilisation, along with recognition
of private property and the rights of individualism.

Philology also, which in the hands of modern investigators has proved
such a splendid instrument of research, was in ancient days studied on
principles too unscientific to be of much use.  Herodotus points out that
the word _Eridanos_ is essentially Greek in character, that consequently
the river supposed to run round the world is probably a mere Greek
invention.  His remarks, however, on language generally, as in the case
of _Piromis_ and the ending of the Persian names, show on what unsound
basis his knowledge of language rested.

In the _Bacchæ_ of Euripides there is an extremely interesting passage in
which the immoral stories of the Greek mythology are accounted for on the
principle of that misunderstanding of words and metaphors to which modern
science has given the name of a disease of language.  In answer to the
impious rationalism of Pentheus—a sort of modern Philistine—Teiresias,
who may be termed the Max Müller of the Theban cycle, points out that the
story of Dionysus being inclosed in Zeus’ thigh really arose from the
linguistic confusion between _μηρός_ and _ὅμηρος_.

On the whole, however—for I have quoted these two instances only to show
the unscientific character of early philology—we may say that this
important instrument in recreating the history of the past was not really
used by the ancients as a means of historical criticism.  Nor did the
ancients employ that other method, used to such advantage in our own day,
by which in the symbolism and formulas of an advanced civilisation we can
detect the unconscious survival of ancient customs: for, whereas in the
sham capture of the bride at a marriage feast, which was common in Wales
till a recent time, we can discern the lingering reminiscence of the
barbarous habit of exogamy, the ancient writers saw only the deliberate
commemoration of an historical event.

Aristotle does not tell us by what method he discovered that the Greeks
used to buy their wives in primitive times, but, judging by his general
principles, it was probably through some legend or myth on the subject
which lasted to his own day, and not, as we would do, by arguing back
from the marriage presents given to the bride and her relatives. {37}

The origin of the common proverb ‘worth so many beeves,’ in which we
discern the unconscious survival of a purely pastoral state of society
before the use of metals was known, is ascribed by Plutarch to the fact
of Theseus having coined money bearing a bull’s head.  Similarly, the
Amathusian festival, in which a young man imitated the labours of a woman
in travail, is regarded by him as a rite instituted in Ariadne’s honour,
and the Carian adoration of asparagus as a simple commemoration of the
adventure of the nymph Perigune.  In the first of these _we_ discern the
beginning of agnation and kinsmanship through the father, which still
lingers in the ‘couvee’ of New Zealand tribes: while the second is a
relic of the totem and fetish worship of plants.

Now, in entire opposition to this modern inductive principle of research
stands the philosophic Plato, whose account of primitive man is entirely
speculative and deductive.

The origin of society he ascribes to necessity, the mother of all
inventions, and imagines that individual man began deliberately to herd
together on account of the advantages of the principle of division of
labour and the rendering of mutual need.

It must, however, be borne in mind that Plato’s object in this whole
passage in the _Republic_ was, perhaps, not so much to analyse the
conditions of early society as to illustrate the importance of the
division of labour, the shibboleth of his political economy, by showing
what a powerful factor it must have been in the most primitive as well as
in the most complex states of society; just as in the _Laws_ he almost
rewrites entirely the history of the Peloponnesus in order to prove the
necessity of a balance of power.  He surely, I mean, must have recognised
himself how essentially incomplete his theory was in taking no account of
the origin of family life, the position and influence of women, and other
social questions, as well as in disregarding those deeper motives of
religion, which are such important factors in early civilisation, and
whose influence Aristotle seems to have clearly apprehended, when he says
that the aim of primitive society was not merely life but the higher
life, and that in the origin of society utility is not the sole motive,
but that there is something spiritual in it if, at least, ‘spiritual’
will bring out the meaning of that complex expression _τὸ καλόν_.
Otherwise, the whole account in the _Republic_ of primitive man will
always remain as a warning against the intrusion of _a priori_
speculations in the domain appropriate to induction.

Now, Aristotle’s theory of the origin of society, like his philosophy of
ethics, rests ultimately on the principle of final causes, not in the
theological meaning of an aim or tendency imposed from without, but in
the scientific sense of function corresponding to organ.  ‘Nature maketh
no thing in vain’ is the text of Aristotle in this as in other inquiries.
Man being the only animal possessed of the power of rational speech is,
he asserts, by nature intended to be social, more so than the bee or any
other gregarious animal.

He is _φύσει πολιτικός_, and the national tendency towards higher forms
of perfection brings the ‘armed savage who used to sell his wife’ to the
free independence of a free state, and to the _ἰσότης τοῦ ἄρχειν καὶ τοῦ
ἄρχεσθαι_, which was the test of true citizenship.  The stages passed
through by humanity start with the family first as the ultimate unit.

The conglomeration of families forms a village ruled by that patriarchal
sway which is the oldest form of government in the world, as is shown by
the fact that all men count it to be the constitution of heaven, and the
villages are merged into the state, and here the progression stops.

For Aristotle, like all Greek thinkers, found his ideal within the walls
of the _πόλις_, yet perhaps in his remark that a united Greece would rule
the world we may discern some anticipation of that ‘federal union of free
states into one consolidated empire’ which, more than the _πόλις_, is to
our eyes the ultimately perfect polity.

How far Aristotle was justified in regarding the family as the ultimate
unit, with the materials afforded to him by Greek literature, I have
already noticed.  Besides, Aristotle, I may remark, had he reflected on
the meaning of that Athenian law which, while prohibiting marriage with a
uterine sister, permitted it with a sister-german, or on the common
tradition in Athens that before the time of Cecrops children bore their
mothers’ names, or on some of the Spartan regulations, could hardly have
failed to see the universality of kinsmanship through women in early
days, and the late appearance of monandry.  Yet, while he missed this
point, in common, it must be acknowledged, with many modern writers, such
as Sir Henry Maine, it is essentially as an explorer of inductive
instances that we recognise his improvement on Plato.  The treatise _περὶ
πολιτείων_, did it remain to us in its entirety, would have been one of
the most valuable landmarks in the progress of historical criticism, and
the first scientific treatise on the science of comparative politics.

A few fragments still remain to us, in one of which we find Aristotle
appealing to the authority of an ancient inscription on the ‘Disk of
Iphitus,’ one of the most celebrated Greek antiquities, to corroborate
his theory of the Lycurgean revival of the Olympian festival; while his
enormous research is evinced in the elaborate explanation he gives of the
historical origin of proverbs such as _οὐδεῖς μέγας κακὸς ἰχθῦς_, of
religious songs like the _ἰῶμεν ἐς Ἀθήνας_ of the Botticean virgins, or
the praises of love and war.

And, finally, it is to be observed how much wider than Plato’s his theory
of the origin of society is.  They both rest on a psychological basis,
but Aristotle’s recognition of the capacity for progress and the tendency
towards a higher life shows how much deeper his knowledge of human nature
was.

In imitation of these two philosophers, Polybius gives an account of the
origin of society in the opening to his philosophy of history.  Somewhat
in the spirit of Plato, he imagines that after one of the cyclic deluges
which sweep off mankind at stated periods and annihilate all pre-existing
civilisation, the few surviving members of humanity coalesce for mutual
protection, and, as in the case with ordinary animals, the one most
remarkable for physical strength is elected king.  In a short time, owing
to the workings of sympathy and the desire of approbation, the moral
qualities begin to make their appearance, and intellectual instead of
bodily excellence becomes the qualification for sovereignty.

Other points, as the rise of law and the like, are dwelt on in a somewhat
modern spirit, and although Polybius seems not to have employed the
inductive method of research in this question, or rather, I should say,
of the hierarchical order of the rational progress of ideas in life, he
is not far removed from what the laborious investigations of modern
travellers have given us.

And, indeed, as regards the working of the speculative faculty in the
creation of history, it is in all respects marvellous how that the most
truthful accounts of the passage from barbarism to civilisation in
ancient literature come from the works of poets.  The elaborate
researches of Mr. Tylor and Sir John Lubbock have done little more than
verify the theories put forward in the _Prometheus Bound_ and the _De
Natura Rerum_; yet neither Æschylus nor Lucretias followed in the modern
path, but rather attained to truth by a certain almost mystic power of
creative imagination, such as we now seek to banish from science as a
dangerous power, though to it science seems to owe many of its most
splendid generalities. {43}

Leaving then the question of the origin of society as treated by the
ancients, I shall now turn to the other and the more important question
of how far they may he said to have attained to what we call the
philosophy of history.

Now at the outset we must note that, while the conceptions of law and
order have been universally received as the governing principles of the
phenomena of nature in the sphere of physical science, yet their
intrusion into the domain of history and the life of man has always been
met with a strong opposition, on the ground of the incalculable nature of
two great forces acting on human action, a certain causeless spontaneity
which men call free will, and the extra-natural interference which they
attribute as a constant attribute to God.

Now, that there is a science of the apparently variable phenomena of
history is a conception which _we_ have perhaps only recently begun to
appreciate; yet, like all other great thoughts, it seems to have come to
the Greek mind spontaneously, through a certain splendour of imagination,
in the morning tide of their civilisation, before inductive research had
armed them with the instruments of verification.  For I think it is
possible to discern in some of the mystic speculations of the early Greek
thinkers that desire to discover what is that ‘invariable existence of
which there are variable states,’ and to incorporate it in some one
formula of law which may serve to explain the different manifestations of
all organic bodies, _man included_, which is the germ of the philosophy
of history; the germ indeed of an idea of which it is not too much to say
that on it any kind of historical criticism, worthy of the name, must
ultimately rest.

For the very first requisite for any scientific conception of history is
the doctrine of uniform sequence: in other words, that certain events
having happened, certain other events corresponding to them will happen
also; that the past is the key of the future.

Now at the birth of this great conception science, it is true, presided,
yet religion it was which at the outset clothed it in its own garb, and
familiarised men with it by appealing to their hearts first and then to
their intellects; knowing that at the beginning of things it is through
the moral nature, and not through the intellectual, that great truths are
spread.

So in Herodotus, who may be taken as a representative of the orthodox
tone of thought, the idea of the uniform sequence of cause and effect
appears under the theological aspect of Nemesis and Providence, which is
really the scientific conception of law, only it is viewed from an
_ethical_ standpoint.

Now in Thucydides the philosophy of history rests on the probability,
which the uniformity of human nature affords us, that the future will in
the course of human things resemble the past, if not reproduce it.  He
appears to contemplate a recurrence of the phenomena of history as
equally certain with a return of the epidemic of the Great Plague.

Notwithstanding what German critics have written on the subject, we must
beware of regarding this conception as a mere reproduction of that cyclic
theory of events which sees in the world nothing but the regular rotation
of Strophe and Antistrophe, in the eternal choir of life and death.

For, in his remarks on the excesses of the Corcyrean Revolution,
Thucydides distinctly rests his idea of the recurrence of history on the
psychological grounds of the general sameness of mankind.

‘The sufferings,’ he says, ‘which revolution entailed upon the cities
were many and terrible, such as have occurred and always will occurs as
long as human nature remains the same, though in a severer or milder
form, and varying in their symptoms according to the variety of the
particular cases.

‘In peace and prosperity states and individuals have better sentiments,
because they are not confronted with imperious necessities; but war takes
away the easy supply of men’s wants, and so proves a hard taskmaster,
which brings most men’s characters to a level with their fortunes.’

IT is evident that here Thucydides is ready to admit the variety of
manifestations which external causes bring about in their workings on the
uniform character of the nature of man.  Yet, after all is said, these
are perhaps but very general statements: the ordinary effects of peace
and war are dwelt on, but there is no real analysis of the immediate
causes and general laws of the phenomena of life, nor does Thucydides
seem to recognise the truth that if humanity proceeds in circles, the
circles are always widening.

Perhaps we may say that with him the philosophy of history is partly in
the metaphysical stage, and see, in the progress of this idea from
Herodotus to Polybius, the exemplification of the Comtian Law of the
three stages of thought, the theological, the metaphysical, and the
scientific: for truly out of the vagueness of theological mysticism this
conception which we call the Philosophy of History was raised to a
scientific principle, according to which the past was explained and the
future predicted by reference to general laws.

Now, just as the earliest account of the nature of the progress of
humanity is to be found in Plato, so in him we find the first explicit
attempt to found a universal philosophy of history upon wide rational
grounds.  Having created an ideally perfect state, the philosopher
proceeds to give an elaborate theory of the complex causes which produce
revolutions, of the moral effects of various forms of government and
education, of the rise of the criminal classes and their connection with
pauperism, and, in a word, to create history by the deductive method and
to proceed from _a priori_ psychological principles to discover the
governing laws of the apparent chaos of political life.

There have been many attempts since Plato to deduce from a single
philosophical principle all the phenomena which experience subsequently
verifies for us.  Fichte thought he could predict the world-plan from the
idea of universal time.  Hegel dreamed he had found the key to the
mysteries of life in the development of freedom, and Krause in the
categories of being.  But the one scientific basis on which the true
philosophy of history must rest is the complete knowledge of the laws of
human nature in all its wants, its aspirations, its powers and its
tendencies: and this great truth, which Thucydides may be said in some
measure to have apprehended, was given to us first by Plato.

Now, it cannot be accurately said of this philosopher that either his
philosophy or his history is entirely and simply _a priori_.  _On est de
son siècle même quand on y proteste_, and so we find in him continual
references to the Spartan mode of life, the Pythagorean system, the
general characteristics of Greek tyrannies and Greek democracies.  For
while, in his account of the method of forming an ideal state, he says
that the political artist is indeed to fix his gaze on the sun of
abstract truth in the heavens of the pure reason, but is sometimes to
turn to the realisation of the ideals on earth: yet, after all, the
general character of the Platonic method, which is what we are specially
concerned with, is essentially deductive and _a priori_.  And he himself,
in the building up of his Nephelococcygia, certainly starts with a
_καθαρὸς πίναξ_, making a clean sweep of all history and all experience;
and it was essentially as an _a priori_ theorist that he is criticised by
Aristotle, as we shall see later.

To proceed to closer details regarding the actual scheme of the laws of
political revolutions as drawn out by Plato, we must first note that the
primary cause of the decay of the ideal state is the general principle,
common to the vegetable and animal worlds as well as to the world of
history, that all created things are fated to decay—a principle which,
though expressed in the terms of a mere metaphysical abstraction, is yet
perhaps in its essence scientific.  For we too must hold that a
continuous redistribution of matter and motion is the inevitable result
of the nominal persistence of Force, and that perfect equilibrium is as
impossible in politics as it certainly is in physics.

The secondary causes which mar the perfection of the Platonic ‘city of
the sun’ are to be found in the intellectual decay of the race consequent
on injudicious marriages and in the Philistine elevation of physical
achievements over mental culture; while the hierarchical succession of
Timocracy and Oligarchy, Democracy and Tyranny, is dwelt on at great
length and its causes analysed in a very dramatic and psychological
manner, if not in that sanctioned by the actual order of history.

And indeed it is apparent at first sight that the Platonic succession of
states represents rather the succession of ideas in the philosophic mind
than any historical succession of time.

Aristotle meets the whole simply by an appeal to facts.  If the theory of
the periodic decay of all created things, he urges, be scientific, it
must be universal, and so true of all the other states as well as of the
ideal.  Besides, a state usually changes into its contrary and not to the
form next to it; so the ideal state would not change into Timocracy;
while Oligarchy, more often than Tyranny, succeeds Democracy.  Plato,
besides, says nothing of what a Tyranny would change to.  According to
the cycle theory it ought to pass into the ideal state again, but as a
fact one Tyranny is changed into another as at Sicyon, or into a
Democracy as at Syracuse, or into an Aristocracy as at Carthage.  The
example of Sicily, too, shows that an Oligarchy is often followed by a
Tyranny, as at Leontini and Gela.  Besides, it is absurd to represent
greed as the chief motive of decay, or to talk of avarice as the root of
Oligarchy, when in nearly all true oligarchies money-making is forbidden
by law.  And finally the Platonic theory neglects the different kinds of
democracies and of tyrannies.

Now nothing can be more important than this passage in Aristotle’s
_Politics_ (_v._ 12.), which may he said to mark an era in the evolution
of historical criticism.  For there is nothing on which Aristotle insists
so strongly as that the generalisations from facts ought to be added to
the data of the _a priori_ method—a principle which we know to be true
not merely of deductive speculative politics but of physics also: for are
not the residual phenomena of chemists a valuable source of improvement
in theory?

His own method is essentially historical though by no means empirical.
On the contrary, this far-seeing thinker, rightly styled _il maestro di
color che sanno_, may be said to have apprehended clearly that the true
method is neither exclusively empirical nor exclusively speculative, but
rather a union of both in the process called Analysis or the
Interpretation of Facts, which has been defined as the application to
facts of such general conceptions as may fix the important
characteristics of the phenomena, and present them permanently in their
true relations.  He too was the first to point out, what even in our own
day is incompletely appreciated, that nature, including the development
of man, is not full of incoherent episodes like a bad tragedy, that
inconsistency and anomaly are as impossible in the moral as they are in
the physical world, and that where the superficial observer thinks he
sees a revolution the philosophical critic discerns merely the gradual
and rational evolution of the inevitable results of certain antecedents.

And while admitting the necessity of a psychological basis for the
philosophy of history, he added to it the important truth that man, to be
apprehended in his proper position in the universe as well as in his
natural powers, must be studied from below in the hierarchical
progression of higher function from the lower forms of life.  The
important maxim, that to obtain a clear conception of anything we must
‘study it in its growth from the very beginning,’ is formally set down in
the opening of the _Politics_, where, indeed, we shall find the other
characteristic features of the modern Evolutionary theory, such as the
‘Differentiation of Function’ and the ‘Survival of the Fittest’
explicitly set forth.

What a valuable step this was in the improvement of the method of
historical criticism it is needless to point out.  By it, one may say,
the true thread was given to guide one’s steps through the bewildering
labyrinth of facts.  For history (to use terms with which Aristotle has
made us familiar) may be looked at from two essentially different
standpoints; either as a work of art whose _τέλος_ or final cause is
external to it and imposed on it from without; or as an organism
containing the law of its own development in itself, and working out its
perfection merely by the fact of being what it is.  Now, if we adopt the
former, which we may style the theological view, we shall be in continual
danger of tripping into the pitfall of some _a priori_ conclusion—that
bourne from which, it has been truly said, no traveller ever returns.

The latter is the only scientific theory and was apprehended in its
fulness by Aristotle, whose application of the inductive method to
history, and whose employment of the evolutionary theory of humanity,
show that he was conscious that the philosophy of history is nothing
separate from the facts of history but is contained in them, and that the
rational law of the complex phenomena of life, like the ideal in the
world of thought, is to be reached through the facts, not superimposed on
them—_κατὰ πολλῶν_ not _παρὰ πολλά_.

And finally, in estimating the enormous debt which the science of
historical criticism owes to Aristotle, we must not pass over his
attitude towards those two great difficulties in the formation of a
philosophy of history on which I have touched above.  I mean the
assertion of extra-natural interference with the normal development of
the world and of the incalculable influence exercised by the power of
free will.

Now, as regards the former, he may be said to have neglected it entirely.
The special acts of providence proceeding from God’s immediate government
of the world, which Herodotus saw as mighty landmarks in history, would
have been to him essentially disturbing elements in that universal reign
of law, the extent of whose limitless empire he of all the great thinkers
of antiquity was the first explicitly to recognise.

Standing aloof from the popular religion as well as from the deeper
conceptions of Herodotus and the Tragic School, he no longer thought of
God as of one with fair limbs and treacherous face haunting wood and
glade, nor would he see in him a jealous judge continually interfering in
the world’s history to bring the wicked to punishment and the proud to a
fall.  God to him was the incarnation of the pure Intellect, a being
whose activity was the contemplation of his own perfection, one whom
Philosophy might imitate but whom prayers could never move, to the
sublime indifference of whose passionless wisdom what were the sons of
men, their desires or their sins?  While, as regards the other difficulty
and the formation of a philosophy of history, the conflict of free will
with general laws appears first in Greek thought in the usual theological
form in which all great ideas seem to be cradled at their birth.

It was such legends as those of Œdipus and Adrastus, exemplifying the
struggles of individual humanity against the overpowering force of
circumstances and necessity, which gave to the early Greeks those same
lessons which we of modern days draw, in somewhat less artistic fashion,
from the study of statistics and the laws of physiology.

In Aristotle, of course, there is no trace of supernatural influence.
The Furies, which drive their victim into sin first and then punishment,
are no longer ‘viper-tressed goddesses with eyes and mouth aflame,’ but
those evil thoughts which harbour within the impure soul.  In this, as in
all other points, to arrive at Aristotle is to reach the pure atmosphere
of scientific and modern thought.

But while he rejected pure necessitarianism in its crude form as
essentially a _reductio ad absurdum_ of life, he was fully conscious of
the fact that the will is not a mysterious and ultimate unit of force
beyond which we cannot go and whose special characteristic is
inconsistency, but a certain creative attitude of the mind which is, from
the first, continually influenced by habits, education and circumstance;
so absolutely modifiable, in a word, that the good and the bad man alike
seem to lose the power of free will; for the one is morally unable to
sin, the other physically incapacitated for reformation.

And of the influence of climate and temperature in forming the nature of
man (a conception perhaps pressed too far in modern days when the ‘race
theory’ is supposed to be a sufficient explanation of the Hindoo, and the
latitude and longitude of a country the best guide to its morals {57})
Aristotle is completely unaware.  I do not allude to such smaller points
as the oligarchical tendencies of a horse-breeding country and the
democratic influence of the proximity of the sea (important though they
are for the consideration of Greek history), but rather to those wider
views in the seventh book of his _Politics_, where he attributes the
happy union in the Greek character of intellectual attainments with the
spirit of progress to the temperate climate they enjoyed, and points out
how the extreme cold of the north dulls the mental faculties of its
inhabitants and renders them incapable of social organisation or extended
empire; while to the enervating heat of eastern countries was due that
want of spirit and bravery which then, as now, was the characteristic of
the population in that quarter of the globe.

Thucydides has shown the causal connection between political revolutions
and the fertility of the soil, but goes a step farther and points out the
psychological influences on a people’s character exercised by the various
extremes of climate—in both cases the first appearance of a most valuable
form of historical criticism.

To the development of Dialectic, as to God, intervals of time are of no
account.  From Plato and Aristotle we pass direct to Polybius.

The progress of thought from the philosopher of the Academe to the
Arcadian historian may be best illustrated by a comparison of the method
by which each of the three writers, whom I have selected as the highest
expression of the rationalism of his respective age, attained to his
ideal state: for the latter conception may be in a measure regarded as
representing the most spiritual principle which they could discern in
history.

Now, Plato created his on _a priori_ principles; Aristotle formed his by
an analysis of existing constitutions; Polybius found his realised for
him in the actual world of fact.  Aristotle criticised the deductive
speculations of Plato by means of inductive negative instances, but
Polybius will not take the ‘Cloud City’ of the _Republic_ into account at
all.  He compares it to an athlete who has never run on ‘Constitution
Hill,’ to a statue so beautiful that it is entirely removed from the
ordinary conditions of humanity, and consequently from the canons of
criticism.

The Roman state had attained in his eyes, by means of the mutual
counteraction of three opposing forces, {59} that stable equilibrium in
politics which was the ideal of all the theoretical writers of antiquity.
And in connection with this point it will be convenient to notice here
how much truth there is contained in the accusation often brought against
the ancients that they knew nothing of the idea of Progress, for the
meaning of many of their speculations will be hidden from us if we do not
try and comprehend first what their aim was, and secondly why it was so.

Now, like all wide generalities, this statement is at least inaccurate.
The prayer of Plato’s ideal City—_ἐξ ἀγαθῶν ἀμείνους_, _καὶ ἐξ ὠφελιμῶν
ὠφελιμωτέρους ἀεὶ τοὺς ἐκγόνους γίγνεσθαι_, might be written as a text
over the door of the last Temple to Humanity raised by the disciples of
Fourier and Saint-Simon, but it is certainly true that their ideal
principle was order and permanence, not indefinite progress.  For,
setting aside the artistic prejudices which would have led the Greeks to
reject this idea of unlimited improvement, we may note that the modern
conception of progress rests partly on the new enthusiasm and worship of
humanity, partly on the splendid hopes of material improvements in
civilisation which applied science has held out to us, two influences
from which ancient Greek thought seems to have been strangely free.  For
the Greeks marred the perfect humanism of the great men whom they
worshipped, by imputing to them divinity and its supernatural powers;
while their science was eminently speculative and often almost mystic in
its character, aiming at culture and not utility, at higher spirituality
and more intense reverence for law, rather than at the increased
facilities of locomotion and the cheap production of common things about
which our modern scientific school ceases not to boast.  And lastly, and
perhaps chiefly, we must remember that the ‘plague spot of all Greek
states,’ as one of their own writers has called it, was the terrible
insecurity to life and property which resulted from the factions and
revolutions which ceased not to trouble Greece at all times, raising a
spirit of fanaticism such as religion raised in the middle ages of
Europe.

These considerations, then, will enable us to understand first how it was
that, radical and unscrupulous reformers as the Greek political theorists
were, yet, their end once attained, no modern conservatives raised such
outcry against the slightest innovation.  Even acknowledged improvements
in such things as the games of children or the modes of music were
regarded by them with feelings of extreme apprehension as the herald of
the _drapeau rouge_ of reform.  And secondly, it will show us how it was
that Polybius found his ideal in the commonwealth of Rome, and Aristotle,
like Mr. Bright, in the middle classes.  Polybius, however, is not
content merely with pointing out his ideal state, but enters at
considerable length into the question of those general laws whose
consideration forms the chief essential of the philosophy of history.

He starts by accepting the general principle that all things are fated to
decay (which I noticed in the case of Plato), and that ‘as iron produces
rust and as wood breeds the animals that destroy it, so every state has
in it the seeds of its own corruption.’  He is not, however, content to
rest there, but proceeds to deal with the more immediate causes of
revolutions, which he says are twofold in nature, either external or
internal.  Now, the former, depending as they do on the synchronous
conjunction of other events outside the sphere of scientific estimation,
are from their very character incalculable; but the latter, though
assuming many forms, always result from the over-great preponderance of
any single element to the detriment of the others, the rational law lying
at the base of all varieties of political changes being that stability
can result only from the statical equilibrium produced by the
counteraction of opposing parts, since the more simple a constitution is
the more it is insecure.  Plato had pointed out before how the extreme
liberty of a democracy always resulted in despotism, but Polybius
analyses the law and shows the scientific principles on which it rests.

The doctrine of the instability of pure constitutions forms an important
era in the philosophy of history.  Its special applicability to the
politics of our own day has been illustrated in the rise of the great
Napoleon, when the French state had lost those divisions of caste and
prejudice, of landed aristocracy and moneyed interest, institutions in
which the vulgar see only barriers to Liberty but which are indeed the
only possible defences against the coming of that periodic Sirius of
politics, the _τύραννος ἐκ προστατικῆς ῥίζης_.

There is a principle which Tocqueville never wearies of explaining, and
which has been subsumed by Mr. Herbert Spencer under that general law
common to all organic bodies which we call the Instability of the
Homogeneous.  The various manifestations of this law, as shown in the
normal, regular revolutions and evolutions of the different forms of
government, {63a} are expounded with great clearness by Polybius, who
claimed for his theory, in the Thucydidean spirit, that it is a _κτῆμα ἐς
ἀεί_, not a mere _ἀγώνισμα ἐς τὸ παραχρῆμα_, and that a knowledge of it
will enable the impartial observer {63b} to discover at any time what
period of its constitutional evolution any particular state has already
reached and into what form it will be next differentiated, though
possibly the exact time of the changes may be more or less uncertain.
{63c}

Now in this necessarily incomplete account of the laws of political
revolutions as expounded by Polybius enough perhaps has been said to show
what is his true position in the rational development of the ‘Idea’ which
I have called the Philosophy of History, because it is the unifying of
history.  Seen darkly as it is through the glass of religion in the pages
of Herodotus, more metaphysical than scientific with Thucydides, Plato
strove to seize it by the eagle-flight of speculation, to reach it with
the eager grasp of a soul impatient of those slower and surer inductive
methods which Aristotle, in his trenchant criticism of his greater
master, showed were more brilliant than any vague theory, if the test of
brilliancy is truth.

What then is the position of Polybius?  Does any new method remain for
him?  Polybius was one of those many men who are born too late to be
original.  To Thucydides belongs the honour of being the first in the
history of Greek thought to discern the supreme calm of law and order
underlying the fitful storms of life, and Plato and Aristotle each
represents a great new principle.  To Polybius belongs the office—how
noble an office he made it his writings show—of making more explicit the
ideas which were implicit in his predecessors, of showing that they were
of wider applicability and perhaps of deeper meaning than they had seemed
before, of examining with more minuteness the laws which they had
discovered, and finally of pointing out more clearly than any one had
done the range of science and the means it offered for analysing the
present and predicting what was to come.  His office thus was to gather
up what they had left, to give their principles new life by a wider
application.

Polybius ends this great diapason of Greek thought.  When the Philosophy
of history appears next, as in Plutarch’s tract on ‘Why God’s anger is
delayed,’ the pendulum of thought had swung back to where it began.  His
theory was introduced to the Romans under the cultured style of Cicero,
and was welcomed by them as the philosophical panegyric of their state.
The last notice of it in Latin literature is in the pages of Tacitus, who
alludes to the stable polity formed out of these elements as a
constitution easier to commend than to produce and in no case lasting.
Yet Polybius had seen the future with no uncertain eye, and had
prophesied the rise of the Empire from the unbalanced power of the
ochlocracy fifty years and more before there was joy in the Julian
household over the birth of that boy who, born to power as the champion
of the people, died wearing the purple of a king.

No attitude of historical criticism is more important than the means by
which the ancients attained to the philosophy of history.  The principle
of heredity can be exemplified in literature as well as in organic life:
Aristotle, Plato and Polybius are the lineal ancestors of Fichte and
Hegel, of Vico and Cousin, of Montesquieu and Tocqueville.

As my aim is not to give an account of historians but to point out those
great thinkers whose methods have furthered the advance of this spirit of
historical criticism, I shall pass over those annalists and chroniclers
who intervened between Thucydides and Polybius.  Yet perhaps it may serve
to throw new light on the real nature of this spirit and its intimate
connection with all other forms of advanced thought if I give some
estimate of the character and rise of those many influences prejudicial
to the scientific study of history which cause such a wide gap between
these two historians.

Foremost among these is the growing influence of rhetoric and the
Isocratean school, which seems to have regarded history as an arena for
the display either of pathos or paradoxes, not a scientific investigation
into laws.

The new age is the age of style.  The same spirit of exclusive attention
to form which made Euripides often, like Swinburne, prefer music to
meaning and melody to morality, which gave to the later Greek statues
that refined effeminacy, that overstrained gracefulness of attitude, was
felt in the sphere of history.  The rules laid down for historical
composition are those relating to the æsthetic value of digressions, the
legality of employing more than one metaphor in the same sentence, and
the like; and historians are ranked not by their power of estimating
evidence but by the goodness of the Greek they write.

I must note also the important influence on literature exercised by
Alexander the Great; for while his travels encouraged the more accurate
research of geography, the very splendour of his achievements seems to
have brought history again into the sphere of romance.  The appearance of
all great men in the world is followed invariably by the rise of that
mythopœic spirit and that tendency to look for the marvellous, which is
so fatal to true historical criticism.  An Alexander, a Napoleon, a
Francis of Assisi and a Mahomet are thought to be outside the limiting
conditions of rational law, just as comets were supposed to be not very
long ago.  While the founding of that city of Alexandria, in which
Western and Eastern thought met with such strange result to both,
diverted the critical tendencies of the Greek spirit into questions of
grammar, philology and the like, the narrow, artificial atmosphere of
that University town (as we may call it) was fatal to the development of
that independent and speculative spirit of research which strikes out new
methods of inquiry, of which historical criticism is one.

The Alexandrines combined a great love of learning with an ignorance of
the true principles of research, an enthusiastic spirit for accumulating
materials with a wonderful incapacity to use them.  Not among the hot
sands of Egypt, or the Sophists of Athens, but from the very heart of
Greece rises the man of genius on whose influence in the evolution of the
philosophy of history I have a short time ago dwelt.  Born in the serene
and pure air of the clear uplands of Arcadia, Polybius may be said to
reproduce in his work the character of the place which gave him birth.
For, of all the historians—I do not say of antiquity but of all time—none
is more rationalistic than he, none more free from any belief in the
‘visions and omens, the monstrous legends, the grovelling superstitions
and unmanly craving for the supernatural’ (_δεισιδαιμονίας ἀγεννοῦς καὶ
τερατείας γυναικώδους_ {68}) which he himself is compelled to notice as
the characteristics of some of the historians who preceded him.
Fortunate in the land which bore him, he was no less blessed in the
wondrous time of his birth.  For, representing in himself the spiritual
supremacy of the Greek intellect and allied in bonds of chivalrous
friendship to the world-conqueror of his day, he seems led as it were by
the hand of Fate ‘to comprehend,’ as has been said, ‘more clearly than
the Romans themselves the historical position of Rome,’ and to discern
with greater insight than all other men could those two great resultants
of ancient civilisation, the material empire of the city of the seven
hills, and the intellectual sovereignty of Hellas.

Before his own day, he says, {69a} the events of the world were
unconnected and separate and the histories confined to particular
countries.  Now, for the first time the universal empire of the Romans
rendered a universal history possible. {69b}  This, then, is the august
motive of his work: to trace the gradual rise of this Italian city from
the day when the first legion crossed the narrow strait of Messina and
landed on the fertile fields of Sicily to the time when Corinth in the
East and Carthage in the West fell before the resistless wave of empire
and the eagles of Rome passed on the wings of universal victory from
Calpe and the Pillars of Hercules to Syria and the Nile.  At the same
time he recognised that the scheme of Rome’s empire was worked out under
the ægis of God’s will. {69c}  For, as one of the Middle Age scribes most
truly says, the _τύχη_ of Polybius is that power which we Christians call
God; the second aim, as one may call it, of his history is to point out
the rational and human and natural causes which brought this result,
distinguishing, as we should say, between God’s mediate and immediate
government of the world.

With any direct intervention of God in the normal development of Man, he
will have nothing to do: still less with any idea of chance as a factor
in the phenomena of life.  Chance and miracles, he says, are mere
expressions for our ignorance of rational causes.  The spirit of
rationalism which we recognised in Herodotus as a vague uncertain
attitude and which appears in Thucydides as a consistent attitude of mind
never argued about or even explained, is by Polybius analysed and
formulated as the great instrument of historical research.

Herodotus, while believing on principle in the supernatural, yet was
sceptical at times.  Thucydides simply ignored the supernatural.  He did
not discuss it, but he annihilated it by explaining history without it.
Polybius enters at length into the whole question and explains its origin
and the method of treating it.  Herodotus would have believed in Scipio’s
dream.  Thucydides would have ignored it entirely.  Polybius explains it.
He is the culmination of the rational progression of Dialectic.
‘Nothing,’ he says, ‘shows a foolish mind more than the attempt to
account for any phenomena on the principle of chance or supernatural
intervention.  History is a search for rational causes, and there is
nothing in the world—even those phenomena which seem to us the most
remote from law and improbable—which is not the logical and inevitable
result of certain rational antecedents.’

Some things, of course, are to be rejected _a priori_ without entering
into the subject: ‘As regards such miracles,’ he says, {71} ‘as that on a
certain statue of Artemis rain or snow never falls though the statue
stands in the open air, or that those who enter God’s shrine in Arcadia
lose their natural shadows, I cannot really be expected to argue upon the
subject.  For these things are not only utterly improbable but absolutely
impossible.’

‘For us to argue reasonably on an acknowledged absurdity is as vain a
task as trying to catch water in a sieve; it is really to admit the
possibility of the supernatural, which is the very point at issue.’

What Polybius felt was that to admit the possibility of a miracle is to
annihilate the possibility of history: for just as scientific and
chemical experiments would be either impossible or useless if exposed to
the chance of continued interference on the part of some foreign body, so
the laws and principles which govern history, the causes of phenomena,
the evolution of progress, the whole science, in a word, of man’s
dealings with his own race and with nature, will remain a sealed book to
him who admits the possibility of extra-natural interference.

The stories of miracles, then, are to be rejected on _a priori_ rational
grounds, but in the case of events which we know to have happened the
scientific historian will not rest till he has discovered their natural
causes which, for instance, in the case of the wonderful rise of the
Roman Empire—the most marvellous thing, Polybius says, which God ever
brought about {72a}—are to be found in the excellence of their
constitution (_τῇ ἰδιότητι τῆς πολιτείας_), the wisdom of their advisers,
their splendid military arrangements, and their superstition (_τῇ
δεισιδαιμονίᾳ_).  For while Polybius regarded the revealed religion as,
of course, objective reality of truth, {72b} he laid great stress on its
moral subjective influence, going, in one passage on the subject, even so
far as almost to excuse the introduction of the supernatural in very
small quantities into history on account of the extremely good effect it
would have on pious people.

But perhaps there is no passage in the whole of ancient and modern
history which breathes such a manly and splendid spirit of rationalism as
one preserved to us in the Vatican—strange resting-place for it!—in which
he treats of the terrible decay of population which had fallen on his
native land in his own day, and which by the general orthodox public was
regarded as a special judgment of God sending childlessness on women as a
punishment for the sins of the people.  For it was a disaster quite
without parallel in the history of the land, and entirely unforeseen by
any of its political-economy writers who, on the contrary, were always
anticipating that danger would arise from an excess of population
overrunning its means of subsistence, and becoming unmanageable through
its size.  Polybius, however, will have nothing to do with either priest
or worker of miracles in this matter.  He will not even seek that ‘sacred
Heart of Greece,’ Delphi, Apollo’s shrine, whose inspiration even
Thucydides admitted and before whose wisdom Socrates bowed.  How foolish,
he says, were the man who on this matter would pray to God.  We must
search for the rational causes, and the causes are seen to be clear, and
the method of prevention also.  He then proceeds to notice how all this
arose from the general reluctance to marriage and to bearing the expense
of educating a large family which resulted from the carelessness and
avarice of the men of his day, and he explains on entirely rational
principles the whole of this apparently supernatural judgment.

Now, it is to be borne in mind that while his rejection of miracles as
violation of inviolable laws is entirely _a priori_—for discussion of
such a matter is, of course, impossible for a rational thinker—yet his
rejection of supernatural intervention rests entirely on the scientific
grounds of the necessity of looking for natural causes.  And he is quite
logical in maintaining his position on these principles.  For, where it
is either difficult or impossible to assign any rational cause for
phenomena, or to discover their laws, he acquiesces reluctantly in the
alternative of admitting some extra-natural interference which his
essentially scientific method of treating the matter has logically forced
on him, approving, for instance, of prayers for rain, on the express
ground that the laws of meteorology had not yet been ascertained.  He
would, of course, have been the first to welcome our modern discoveries
in the matter.  The passage in question is in every way one of the most
interesting in his whole work, not, of course, as signifying any
inclination on his part to acquiesce in the supernatural, but because it
shows how essentially logical and rational his method of argument was,
and how candid and fair his mind.

Having now examined Polybius’s attitude towards the supernatural and the
general ideas which guided his research, I will proceed to examine the
method he pursued in his scientific investigation of the complex
phenomena of life.  For, as I have said before in the course of this
essay, what is important in all great writers is not so much the results
they arrive at as the methods they pursue.  The increased knowledge of
facts may alter any conclusion in history as in physical science, and the
canons of speculative historical credibility must be acknowledged to
appeal rather to that subjective attitude of mind which we call the
historic sense than to any formulated objective rules.  But a scientific
method is a gain for all time, and the true if not the only progress of
historical criticism consists in the improvement of the instruments of
research.

Now first, as regards his conception of history, I have already pointed
out that it was to him essentially a search for causes, a problem to be
solved, not a picture to be painted, a scientific investigation into laws
and tendencies, not a mere romantic account of startling incident and
wondrous adventure.  Thucydides, in the opening of his great work, had
sounded the first note of the scientific conception of history.  ‘The
absence of romance in my pages,’ he says, ‘will, I fear, detract somewhat
from its value, but I have written my work not to be the exploit of a
passing hour but as the possession of all time.’ {76}  Polybius follows
with words almost entirely similar.  If, he says, we banish from history
the consideration of causes, methods and motives (_τὸ διὰ τί_, _καὶ πως_,
_καὶ τίνος χάριν_), and refuse to consider how far the result of anything
is its rational consequent, what is left is a mere _ἀγώνισμα_, not a
_μάθημα_, an oratorical essay which may give pleasure for the moment, but
which is entirely without any scientific value for the explanation of the
future.  Elsewhere he says that ‘history robbed of the exposition of its
causes and laws is a profitless thing, though it may allure a fool.’  And
all through his history the same point is put forward and exemplified in
every fashion.

So far for the conception of history.  Now for the groundwork.  As
regards the character of the phenomena to be selected by the scientific
investigator, Aristotle had laid down the general formula that nature
should be studied in her normal manifestations.  Polybius, true to his
character of applying explicitly the principles implicit in the work of
others, follows out the doctrine of Aristotle, and lays particular stress
on the rational and undisturbed character of the development of the Roman
constitution as affording special facilities for the discovery of the
laws of its progress.  Political revolutions result from causes either
external or internal.  The former are mere disturbing forces which lie
outside the sphere of scientific calculation.  It is the latter which are
important for the establishing of principles and the elucidation of the
sequences of rational evolution.

He thus may be said to have anticipated one of the most important truths
of the modern methods of investigation: I mean that principle which lays
down that just as the study of physiology should precede the study of
pathology, just as the laws of disease are best discovered by the
phenomena presented in health, so the method of arriving at all great
social and political truths is by the investigation of those cases where
development has been normal, rational and undisturbed.

The critical canon that the more a people has been interfered with, the
more difficult it becomes to generalise the laws of its progress and to
analyse the separate forces of its civilisation, is one the validity of
which is now generally recognised by those who pretend to a scientific
treatment of all history: and while we have seen that Aristotle
anticipated it in a general formula, to Polybius belongs the honour of
being the first to apply it explicitly in the sphere of history.

I have shown how to this great scientific historian the motive of his
work was essentially the search for causes; and true to his analytical
spirit he is careful to examine what a cause really is and in what part
of the antecedents of any consequent it is to be looked for.  To give an
illustration: As regards the origin of the war with Perseus, some
assigned as causes the expulsion of Abrupolis by Perseus, the expedition
of the latter to Delphi, the plot against Eumenes and the seizure of the
ambassadors in Bœotia; of these incidents the two former, Polybius points
out, were merely the pretexts, the two latter merely the occasions of the
war.  The war was really a legacy left to Perseus by his father, who was
determined to fight it out with Rome. {78}

Here as elsewhere he is not originating any new idea.  Thucydides had
pointed out the difference between the real and the alleged cause, and
the Aristotelian dictum about revolutions, _οὐ περὶ μικρῶν ἀλλ’ ἐκ
μικρῶν_, draws the distinction between cause and occasion with the
brilliancy of an epigram.  But the explicit and rational investigation of
the difference between _αἰτία_, _ἀρχὴ_, and _πρόφασις_ was reserved for
Polybius.  No canon of historical criticism can be said to be of more
real value than that involved in this distinction, and the overlooking of
it has filled our histories with the contemptible accounts of the
intrigues of courtiers and of kings and the petty plottings of backstairs
influence—particulars interesting, no doubt, to those who would ascribe
the Reformation to Anne Boleyn’s pretty face, the Persian war to the
influence of a doctor or a curtain-lecture from Atossa, or the French
Revolution to Madame de Maintenon, but without any value for those who
aim at any scientific treatment of history.

But the question of method, to which I am compelled always to return, is
not yet exhausted.  There is another aspect in which it may be regarded,
and I shall now proceed to treat of it.

One of the greatest difficulties with which the modern historian has to
contend is the enormous complexity of the facts which come under his
notice: D’Alembert’s suggestion that at the end of every century a
selection of facts should be made and the rest burned (if it was really
intended seriously) could not, of course, be entertained for a moment.  A
problem loses all its value when it becomes simplified, and the world
would be all the poorer if the Sibyl of History burned her volumes.
Besides, as Gibbon pointed out, ‘a Montesquieu will detect in the most
insignificant fact relations which the vulgar overlook.’

Nor can the scientific investigator of history isolate the particular
elements, which he desires to examine, from disturbing and extraneous
causes, as the experimental chemist can do (though sometimes, as in the
case of lunatic asylums and prisons, he is enabled to observe phenomena
in a certain degree of isolation).  So he is compelled either to use the
deductive mode of arguing from general laws or to employ the method of
abstraction, which gives a fictitious isolation to phenomena never so
isolated in actual existence.  And this is exactly what Polybius has done
as well as Thucydides.  For, as has been well remarked, there is in the
works of these two writers a certain plastic unity of type and motive;
whatever they write is penetrated through and through with a specific
quality, a singleness and concentration of purpose, which we may contrast
with the more comprehensive width as manifested not merely in the modern
mind, but also in Herodotus.  Thucydides, regarding society as influenced
entirely by political motives, took no account of forces of a different
nature, and consequently his results, like those of most modern political
economists, have to be modified largely {81} before they come to
correspond with what we know was the actual state of fact.  Similarly,
Polybius will deal only with those forces which tended to bring the
civilised world under the dominion of Rome (ix. 1), and in the
Thucydidean spirit points out the want of picturesqueness and romance in
his pages which is the result of the abstract method (_τὸ μονοειδὲς τῆς
συντάξεως_) being careful also to tell us that his rejection of all other
forces is essentially deliberate and the result of a preconceived theory
and by no means due to carelessness of any kind.

Now, of the general value of the abstract method and the legality of its
employment in the sphere of history, this is perhaps not the suitable
occasion for any discussion.  It is, however, in all ways worthy of note
that Polybius is not merely conscious of, but dwells with particular
weight on, the fact which is usually urged as the strongest objection to
the employment of the abstract method—I mean the conception of a society
as a sort of human organism whose parts are indissolubly connected with
one another and all affected when one member is in any way agitated.
This conception of the organic nature of society appears first in Plato
and Aristotle, who apply it to cities.  Polybius, as his wont is, expands
it to be a general characteristic of all history.  It is an idea of the
very highest importance, especially to a man like Polybius whose thoughts
are continually turned towards the essential unity of history and the
impossibility of isolation.

Farther, as regards the particular method of investigating that group of
phenomena obtained for him by the abstract method, he will adopt, he
tells us, neither the purely deductive nor the purely inductive mode but
the union of both.  In other words, he formally adopts that method of
analysis upon the importance of which I have dwelt before.

And lastly, while, without doubt, enormous simplicity in the elements
under consideration is the result of the employment of the abstract
method, even within the limit thus obtained a certain selection must be
made, and a selection involves a theory.  For the facts of life cannot be
tabulated with as great an ease as the colours of birds and insects can
be tabulated.  Now, Polybius points out that those phenomena particularly
are to be dwelt on which may serve as a _παράδειγμα_ or sample, and show
the character of the tendencies of the age as clearly as ‘a single drop
from a full cask will be enough to disclose the nature of the whole
contents.’  This recognition of the importance of single facts, not in
themselves but because of the spirit they represent, is extremely
scientific; for we know that from the single bone, or tooth even, the
anatomist can recreate entirely the skeleton of the primeval horse, and
the botanist tell the character of the flora and fauna of a district from
a single specimen.

Regarding truth as ‘the most divine thing in Nature,’ the very ‘eye and
light of history without which it moves a blind thing,’ Polybius spared
no pains in the acquisition of historical materials or in the study of
the sciences of politics and war, which he considered were so essential
to the training of the scientific historian, and the labour he took is
mirrored in the many ways in which he criticises other authorities.

There is something, as a rule, slightly contemptible about ancient
criticism.  The modern idea of the critic as the interpreter, the
expounder of the beauty and excellence of the work he selects, seems
quite unknown.  Nothing can be more captious or unfair, for instance,
than the method by which Aristotle criticised the ideal state of Plato in
his ethical works, and the passages quoted by Polybius from Timæus show
that the latter historian fully deserved the punning name given to him.
But in Polybius there is, I think, little of that bitterness and
pettiness of spirit which characterises most other writers, and an
incidental story he tells of his relations with one of the historians
whom he criticised shows that he was a man of great courtesy and
refinement of taste—as, indeed, befitted one who had lived always in the
society of those who were of great and noble birth.

Now, as regards the character of the canons by which he criticises the
works of other authors, in the majority of cases he employs simply his
own geographical and military knowledge, showing, for instance, the
impossibility in the accounts given of Nabis’s march from Sparta simply
by his acquaintance with the spots in question; or the inconsistency of
those of the battle of Issus; or of the accounts given by Ephorus of the
battles of Leuctra and Mantinea.  In the latter case he says, if any one
will take the trouble to measure out the ground of the site of the battle
and then test the manœuvres given, he will find how inaccurate the
accounts are.

In other cases he appeals to public documents, the importance of which he
was always foremost in recognising; showing, for instance, by a document
in the public archives of Rhodes how inaccurate were the accounts given
of the battle of Lade by Zeno and Antisthenes.  Or he appeals to
psychological probability, rejecting, for instance, the scandalous
stories told of Philip of Macedon, simply from the king’s general
greatness of character, and arguing that a boy so well educated and so
respectably connected as Demochares (xii. 14) could never have been
guilty of that of which evil rumour accused him.

But the chief object of his literary censure is Timæus, who had been
unsparing of his strictures on others.  The general point which he makes
against him, impugning his accuracy as a historian, is that he derived
his knowledge of history not from the dangerous perils of a life of
action but in the secure indolence of a narrow scholastic life.  There
is, indeed, no point on which he is so vehement as this.  ‘A history,’ he
says, ‘written in a library gives as lifeless and as inaccurate a picture
of history as a painting which is copied not from a living animal but
from a stuffed one.’

There is more difference, he says in another place, between the history
of an eye-witness and that of one whose knowledge comes from books, than
there is between the scenes of real life and the fictitious landscapes of
theatrical scenery.  Besides this, he enters into somewhat elaborate
detailed criticism of passages where he thought Timæus was following a
wrong method and perverting truth, passages which it will be worth while
to examine in detail.

Timæus, from the fact of there being a Roman custom to shoot a war-horse
on a stated day, argued back to the Trojan origin of that people.
Polybius, on the other hand, points out that the inference is quite
unwarrantable, because horse-sacrifices are ordinary institutions common
to all barbarous tribes.  Timæus here, as was common with Greek writers,
is arguing back from some custom of the present to an historical event in
the past.  Polybius really is employing the comparative method, showing
how the custom was an ordinary step in the civilisation of every early
people.

In another place, {86} he shows how illogical is the scepticism of Timæus
as regards the existence of the Bull of Phalaris simply by appealing to
the statue of the Bull, which was still to be seen in Carthage; pointing
out how impossible it was, on any other theory except that it belonged to
Phalaris, to account for the presence in Carthage of a bull of this
peculiar character with a door between his shoulders.  But one of the
great points which he uses against this Sicilian historian is in
reference to the question of the origin of the Locrian colony.  In
accordance with the received tradition on the subject, Aristotle had
represented the Locrian colony as founded by some Parthenidæ or slaves’
children, as they were called, a statement which seems to have roused the
indignation of Timæus, who went to a good deal of trouble to confute this
theory.  He does so on the following grounds:—

First of all, he points out that in the ancient days the Greeks had no
slaves at all, so the mention of them in the matter is an anachronism;
and next he declares that he was shown in the Greek city of Locris
certain ancient inscriptions in which their relation to the Italian city
was expressed in terms of the position between parent and child, which
showed also that mutual rights of citizenship were accorded to each city.
Besides this, he appeals to various questions of improbability as regards
their international relationship, on which Polybius takes diametrically
opposite grounds which hardly call for discussion.  And in favour of his
own view he urges two points more: first, that the Lacedæmonians being
allowed furlough for the purpose of seeing their wives at home, it was
unlikely that the Locrians should not have had the same privilege; and
next, that the Italian Locrians knew nothing of the Aristotelian version
and had, on the contrary, very severe laws against adulterers, runaway
slaves and the like.  Now, most of these questions rest on mere
probability, which is always such a subjective canon that an appeal to it
is rarely conclusive.  I would note, however, as regards the inscriptions
which, if genuine, would of course have settled the matter, that Polybius
looks on them as a mere invention on the part of Timæus, who, he remarks,
gives no details about them, though, as a rule, he is over-anxious to
give chapter and verse for everything.  A somewhat more interesting point
is that where he attacks Timæus for the introduction of fictitious
speeches into his narrative; for on this point Polybius seems to be far
in advance of the opinions held by literary men on the subject not merely
in his own day, but for centuries after.

Herodotus had introduced speeches avowedly dramatic and fictitious.
Thucydides states clearly that, where he was unable to find out what
people really said, he put down what they ought to have said.  Sallust
alludes, it is true, to the fact of the speech he puts into the mouth of
the tribune Memmius being essentially genuine, but the speeches given in
the senate on the occasion of the Catilinarian conspiracy are very
different from the same orations as they appear in Cicero.  Livy makes
his ancient Romans wrangle and chop logic with all the subtlety of a
Hortensius or a Scævola.  And even in later days, when shorthand
reporters attended the debates of the senate and a _Daily News_ was
published in Rome, we find that one of the most celebrated speeches in
Tacitus (that in which the Emperor Claudius gives the Gauls their
freedom) is shown, by an inscription discovered recently at Lugdunum, to
be entirely fabulous.

Upon the other hand, it must be borne in mind that these speeches were
not intended to deceive; they were regarded merely as a certain dramatic
element which it was allowable to introduce into history for the purpose
of giving more life and reality to the narration, and were to be
criticised, not as we should, by arguing how in an age before shorthand
was known such a report was possible or how, in the failure of written
documents, tradition could bring down such an accurate verbal account,
but by the higher test of their psychological probability as regards the
persons in whose mouths they are placed.  An ancient historian in answer
to modern criticism would say, probably, that these fictitious speeches
were in reality more truthful than the actual ones, just as Aristotle
claimed for poetry a higher degree of truth in comparison to history.
The whole point is interesting as showing how far in advance of his age
Polybius may be said to have been.

The last scientific historian, it is possible to gather from his writings
what he considered were the characteristics of the ideal writer of
history; and no small light will be thrown on the progress of historical
criticism if we strive to collect and analyse what in Polybius are more
or less scattered expressions.  The ideal historian must be contemporary
with the events he describes, or removed from them by one generation
only.  Where it is possible, he is to be an eye-witness of what he writes
of; where that is out of his power he is to test all traditions and
stories carefully and not to be ready to accept what is plausible in
place of what is true.  He is to be no bookworm living aloof from the
experiences of the world in the artificial isolation of a university
town, but a politician, a soldier, and a traveller, a man not merely of
thought but of action, one who can do great things as well as write of
them, who in the sphere of history could be what Byron and Æschylus were
in the sphere of poetry, at once _le chantre et le héros_.

He is to keep before his eyes the fact that chance is merely a synonym
for our ignorance; that the reign of law pervades the domain of history
as much as it does that of political science.  He is to accustom himself
to look on all occasions for rational and natural causes.  And while he
is to recognise the practical utility of the supernatural, in an
educational point of view, he is not himself to indulge in such
intellectual beating of the air as to admit the possibility of the
violation of inviolable laws, or to argue in a sphere wherein argument is
_a priori_ annihilated.  He is to be free from all bias towards friend
and country; he is to be courteous and gentle in criticism; he is not to
regard history as a mere opportunity for splendid and tragic writing; nor
is he to falsify truth for the sake of a paradox or an epigram.

While acknowledging the importance of particular facts as samples of
higher truths, he is to take a broad and general view of humanity.  He is
to deal with the whole race and with the world, not with particular
tribes or separate countries.  He is to bear in mind that the world is
really an organism wherein no one part can be moved without the others
being affected also.  He is to distinguish between cause and occasion,
between the influence of general laws and particular fancies, and he is
to remember that the greatest lessons of the world are contained in
history and that it is the historian’s duty to manifest them so as to
save nations from following those unwise policies which always lead to
dishonour and ruin, and to teach individuals to apprehend by the
intellectual culture of history those truths which else they would have
to learn in the bitter school of experience.

Now, as regards his theory of the necessity of the historian’s being
contemporary with the events he describes, so far as the historian is a
mere narrator the remark is undoubtedly true.  But to appreciate the
harmony and rational position of the facts of a great epoch, to discover
its laws, the causes which produced it and the effects which it
generates, the scene must be viewed from a certain height and distance to
be completely apprehended.  A thoroughly contemporary historian such as
Lord Clarendon or Thucydides is in reality part of the history he
criticises; and, in the case of such contemporary historians as Fabius
and Philistus, Polybius in compelled to acknowledge that they are misled
by patriotic and other considerations.  Against Polybius himself no such
accusation can be made.  He indeed of all men is able, as from some lofty
tower, to discern the whole tendency of the ancient world, the triumph of
Roman institutions and of Greek thought which is the last message of the
old world and, in a more spiritual sense, has become the Gospel of the
new.

One thing indeed he did not see, or if he saw it, he thought but little
of it—how from the East there was spreading over the world, as a wave
spreads, a spiritual inroad of new religions from the time when the
Pessinuntine mother of the gods, a shapeless mass of stone, was brought
to the eternal city by her holiest citizen, to the day when the ship
_Castor and Pollux_ stood in at Puteoli, and St. Paul turned his face
towards martyrdom and victory at Rome.  Polybius was able to predict,
from his knowledge of the causes of revolutions and the tendencies of the
various forms of governments, the uprising of that democratic tone of
thought which, as soon as a seed is sown in the murder of the Gracchi and
the exile of Marius, culminated as all democratic movements do culminate,
in the supreme authority of one man, the lordship of the world under the
world’s rightful lord, Caius Julius Cæsar.  This, indeed, he saw in no
uncertain way.  But the turning of all men’s hearts to the East, the
first glimmering of that splendid dawn which broke over the hills of
Galilee and flooded the earth like wine, was hidden from his eyes.

There are many points in the description of the ideal historian which one
may compare to the picture which Plato has given us of the ideal
philosopher.  They are both ‘spectators of all time and all existence.’
Nothing is contemptible in their eyes, for all things have a meaning, and
they both walk in august reasonableness before all men, conscious of the
workings of God yet free from all terror of mendicant priest or vagrant
miracle-worker.  But the parallel ends here.  For the one stands aloof
from the world-storm of sleet and hail, his eyes fixed on distant and
sunlit heights, loving knowledge for the sake of knowledge and wisdom for
the joy of wisdom, while the other is an eager actor in the world ever
seeking to apply his knowledge to useful things.  Both equally desire
truth, but the one because of its utility, the other for its beauty.  The
historian regards it as the rational principle of all true history, and
no more.  To the other it comes as an all-pervading and mystic
enthusiasm, ‘like the desire of strong wine, the craving of ambition, the
passionate love of what is beautiful.’

Still, though we miss in the historian those higher and more spiritual
qualities which the philosopher of the Academe alone of all men
possessed, we must not blind ourselves to the merits of that great
rationalist who seems to have anticipated the very latest words of modern
science.  Nor yet is he to be regarded merely in the narrow light in
which he is estimated by most modern critics, as the explicit champion of
rationalism and nothing more.  For he is connected with another idea, the
course of which is as the course of that great river of his native
Arcadia which, springing from some arid and sun-bleached rock, gathers
strength and beauty as it flows till it reaches the asphodel meadows of
Olympia and the light and laughter of Ionian waters.

For in him we can discern the first notes of that great cult of the
seven-hilled city which made Virgil write his epic and Livy his history,
which found in Dante its highest exponent, which dreamed of an Empire
where the Emperor would care for the bodies and the Pope for the souls of
men, and so has passed into the conception of God’s spiritual empire and
the universal brotherhood of man and widened into the huge ocean of
universal thought as the Peneus loses itself in the sea.

Polybius is the last scientific historian of Greece.  The writer who
seems fittingly to complete the progress of thought is a writer of
biographies only.  I will not here touch on Plutarch’s employment of the
inductive method as shown in his constant use of inscription and statue,
of public document and building and the like, because it involves no new
method.  It is his attitude towards miracles of which I desire to treat.

Plutarch is philosophic enough to see that in the sense of a violation of
the laws of nature a miracle is impossible.  It is absurd, he says, to
imagine that the statue of a saint can speak, and that an inanimate
object not possessing the vocal organs should be able to utter an
articulate sound.  Upon the other hand, he protests against science
imagining that, by explaining the natural causes of things, it has
explained away their transcendental meaning.  ‘When the tears on the
cheek of some holy statue have been analysed into the moisture which
certain temperatures produce on wood and marble, it yet by no means
follows that they were not a sign of grief and mourning set there by God
Himself.’  When Lampon saw in the prodigy of the one-horned ram the omen
of the supreme rule of Pericles, and when Anaxagoras showed that the
abnormal development was the rational resultant of the peculiar formation
of the skull, the dreamer and the man of science were both right; it was
the business of the latter to consider how the prodigy came about, of the
former to show why it was so formed and what it so portended.  The
progression of thought is exemplified in all particulars.  Herodotus had
a glimmering sense of the impossibility of a violation of nature.
Thucydides ignored the supernatural.  Polybius rationalised it.  Plutarch
raises it to its mystical heights again, though he bases it on law.  In a
word, Plutarch felt that while science brings the supernatural down to
the natural, yet ultimately all that is natural is really supernatural.
To him, as to many of our own day, religion was that transcendental
attitude of the mind which, contemplating a world resting on inviolable
law, is yet comforted and seeks to worship God not in the violation but
in the fulfilment of nature.

It may seem paradoxical to quote in connection with the priest of
Chæronea such a pure rationalist as Mr. Herbert Spencer; yet when we read
as the last message of modern science that ‘when the equation of life has
been reduced to its lowest terms the symbols are symbols still,’ mere
signs, that is, of that unknown reality which underlies all matter and
all spirit, we may feel how over the wide strait of centuries thought
calls to thought and how Plutarch has a higher position than is usually
claimed for him in the progress of the Greek intellect.

And, indeed, it seems that not merely the importance of Plutarch himself
but also that of the land of his birth in the evolution of Greek
civilisation has been passed over by modern critics.  To us, indeed, the
bare rock to which the Parthenon serves as a crown, and which lies
between Colonus and Attica’s violet hills, will always be the holiest
spot in the land of Greece: and Delphi will come next, and then the
meadows of Eurotas where that noble people lived who represented in
Hellenic thought the reaction of the law of duty against the law of
beauty, the opposition of conduct to culture.  Yet, as one stands on the
_σχιστὴ ὁδός_ of Cithæron and looks out on the great double plain of
Boeotia, the enormous importance of the division of Hellas comes to one’s
mind with great force.  To the north are Orchomenus and the Minyan
treasure-house, seat of those merchant princes of Phoenicia who brought
to Greece the knowledge of letters and the art of working in gold.
Thebes is at our feet with the gloom of the terrible legends of Greek
tragedy still lingering about it, the birthplace of Pindar, the nurse of
Epaminondas and the Sacred Band.

And from out of the plain where ‘Mars loved to dance,’ rises the Muses’
haunt, Helicon, by whose silver streams Corinna and Hesiod sang; while
far away under the white ægis of those snow-capped mountains lies
Chæronea and the Lion plain where with vain chivalry the Greeks strove to
check Macedon first and afterwards Rome; Chæronea, where in the Martinmas
summer of Greek civilisation Plutarch rose from the drear waste of a
dying religion as the aftermath rises when the mowers think they have
left the field bare.

Greek philosophy began and ended in scepticism: the first and the last
word of Greek history was Faith.

Splendid thus in its death, like winter sunsets, the Greek religion
passed away into the horror of night.  For the Cimmerian darkness was at
hand, and when the schools of Athens were closed and the statue of Athena
broken, the Greek spirit passed from the gods and the history of its own
land to the subtleties of defining the doctrine of the Trinity and the
mystical attempts to bring Plato into harmony with Christ and to
reconcile Gethsemane and the Sermon on the Mount with the Athenian prison
and the discussion in the woods of Colonus.  The Greek spirit slept for
wellnigh a thousand years.  When it woke again, like Antæus it had
gathered strength from the earth where it lay; like Apollo it had lost
none of its divinity through its long servitude.

In the history of Roman thought we nowhere find any of those
characteristics of the Greek Illumination which I have pointed out are
the necessary concomitants of the rise of historical criticism.  The
conservative respect for tradition which made the Roman people delight in
the ritual and formulas of law, and is as apparent in their politics as
in their religion, was fatal to any rise of that spirit of revolt against
authority the importance of which, as a factor in intellectual progress,
we have already seen.

The whitened tables of the Pontifices preserved carefully the records of
the eclipses and other atmospherical phenomena, and what we call the art
of verifying dates was known to them at an early time; but there was no
spontaneous rise of physical science to suggest by its analogies of law
and order a new method of research, nor any natural springing up of the
questioning spirit of philosophy with its unification of all phenomena
and all knowledge.  At the very time when the whole tide of Eastern
superstition was sweeping into the heart of the Capital the Senate
banished the Greek philosophers from Rome.  And of the three systems
which did at length take some root in the city, those of Zeno and
Epicurus were used merely as the rule for the ordering of life, while the
dogmatic scepticism of Carneades, by its very principles, annihilated the
possibility of argument and encouraged a perfect indifference to
research.

Nor were the Romans ever fortunate enough like the Greeks to have to face
the incubus of any dogmatic system of legends and myths, the immoralities
and absurdities of which might excite a revolutionary outbreak of
sceptical criticism.  For the Roman religion became as it were
crystallised and isolated from progress at an early period of its
evolution.  Their gods remained mere abstractions of commonplace virtues
or uninteresting personifications of the useful things of life.  The old
primitive creed was indeed always upheld as a state institution on
account of the enormous facilities it offered for cheating in politics,
but as a spiritual system of belief it was unanimously rejected at a very
early period both by the common people and the educated classes, for the
sensible reason that it was so extremely dull.  The former took refuge in
the mystic sensualities of the worship of Isis, the latter in the Stoical
rules of life.  The Romans classified their gods carefully in their order
of precedence, analysed their genealogies in the laborious spirit of
modern heraldry, fenced them round with a ritual as intricate as their
law, but never quite cared enough about them to believe in them.  So it
was of no account with them when the philosophers announced that Minerva
was merely memory.  She had never been much else.  Nor did they protest
when Lucretius dared to say of Ceres and of Liber that they were only the
corn of the field and the fruit of the vine.  For they had never mourned
for the daughter of Demeter in the asphodel meadows of Sicily, nor
traversed the glades of Cithæron with fawn-skin and with spear.

This brief sketch of the condition of Roman thought will serve to prepare
us for the almost total want of scientific historical criticism which we
shall discern in their literature, and has, besides, afforded fresh
corroboration of the conditions essential to the rise of this spirit, and
of the modes of thought which it reflects and in which it is always to be
found.  Roman historical composition had its origin in the pontifical
college of ecclesiastical lawyers, and preserved to its close the
uncritical spirit which characterised its fountain-head.  It possessed
from the outset a most voluminous collection of the materials of history,
which, however, produced merely antiquarians, not historians.  It is so
hard to use facts, so easy to accumulate them.

Wearied of the dull monotony of the pontifical annals, which dwelt on
little else but the rise and fall in provisions and the eclipses of the
sun, Cato wrote out a history with his own hand for the instruction of
his child, to which he gave the name of Origines, and before his time
some aristocratic families had written histories in Greek much in the
same spirit in which the Germans of the eighteenth century used French as
the literary language.  But the first regular Roman historian is Sallust.
Between the extravagant eulogies passed on this author by the French
(such as De Closset), and Dr. Mommsen’s view of him as merely a political
pamphleteer, it is perhaps difficult to reach the _via media_ of
unbiassed appreciation.  He has, at any rate, the credit of being a
purely rationalistic historian, perhaps the only one in Roman literature.
Cicero had a good many qualifications for a scientific historian, and (as
he usually did) thought very highly of his own powers.  On passages of
ancient legend, however, he is rather unsatisfactory, for while he is too
sensible to believe them he is too patriotic to reject them.  And this is
really the attitude of Livy, who claims for early Roman legend a certain
uncritical homage from the rest of the subject world.  His view in his
history is that it is not worth while to examine the truth of these
stories.

In his hands the history of Rome unrolls before our eyes like some
gorgeous tapestry, where victory succeeds victory, where triumph treads
on the heels of triumph, and the line of heroes seems never to end.  It
is not till we pass behind the canvas and see the slight means by which
the effect is produced that we apprehend the fact that like most
picturesque writers Livy is an indifferent critic.  As regards his
attitude towards the credibility of early Roman history he is quite as
conscious as we are of its mythical and unsound nature.  He will not, for
instance, decide whether the Horatii were Albans or Romans; who was the
first dictator; how many tribunes there were, and the like.  His method,
as a rule, is merely to mention all the accounts and sometimes to decide
in favour of the most probable, but usually not to decide at all.  No
canons of historical criticism will ever discover whether the Roman women
interviewed the mother of Coriolanus of their own accord or at the
suggestion of the senate; whether Remus was killed for jumping over his
brother’s wall or because they quarrelled about birds; whether the
ambassadors found Cincinnatus ploughing or only mending a hedge.  Livy
suspends his judgment over these important facts and history when
questioned on their truth is dumb.  If he does select between two
historians he chooses the one who is nearer to the facts he describes.
But he is no critic, only a conscientious writer.  It is mere vain waste
to dwell on his critical powers, for they do not exist.

                                * * * * *

In the case of Tacitus imagination has taken the place of history.  The
past lives again in his pages, but through no laborious criticism; rather
through a dramatic and psychological faculty which he specially
possessed.

In the philosophy of history he has no belief.  He can never make up his
mind what to believe as regards God’s government of the world.  There is
no method in him and none elsewhere in Roman literature.

Nations may not have missions but they certainly have functions.  And the
function of ancient Italy was not merely to give us what is statical in
our institutions and rational in our law, but to blend into one elemental
creed the spiritual aspirations of Aryan and of Semite.  Italy was not a
pioneer in intellectual progress, nor a motive power in the evolution of
thought.  The owl of the goddess of Wisdom traversed over the whole land
and found nowhere a resting-place.  The dove, which is the bird of
Christ, flew straight to the city of Rome and the new reign began.  It
was the fashion of early Italian painters to represent in mediæval
costume the soldiers who watched over the tomb of Christ, and this, which
was the result of the frank anachronism of all true art, may serve to us
as an allegory.  For it was in vain that the Middle Ages strove to guard
the buried spirit of progress.  When the dawn of the Greek spirit arose,
the sepulchre was empty, the grave-clothes laid aside.  Humanity had
risen from the dead.

The study of Greek, it has been well said, implies the birth of
criticism, comparison and research.  At the opening of that education of
modern by ancient thought which we call the Renaissance, it was the words
of Aristotle which sent Columbus sailing to the New World, while a
fragment of Pythagorean astronomy set Copernicus thinking on that train
of reasoning which has revolutionised the whole position of our planet in
the universe.  Then it was seen that the only meaning of progress is a
return to Greek modes of thought.  The monkish hymns which obscured the
pages of Greek manuscripts were blotted out, the splendours of a new
method were unfolded to the world, and out of the melancholy sea of
mediævalism rose the free spirit of man in all that splendour of glad
adolescence, when the bodily powers seem quickened by a new vitality,
when the eye sees more clearly than its wont and the mind apprehends what
was beforetime hidden from it.  To herald the opening of the sixteenth
century, from the little Venetian printing press came forth all the great
authors of antiquity, each bearing on the title-page the words _Ἅλδος ὁ
Μανούτιος Ῥωμαῖος καὶ Φιλέλλην_; words which may serve to remind us with
what wondrous prescience Polybius saw the world’s fate when he foretold
the material sovereignty of Roman institutions and exemplified in himself
the intellectual empire of Greece.

The course of the study of the spirit of historical criticism has not
been a profitless investigation into modes and forms of thought now
antiquated and of no account.  The only spirit which is entirely removed
from us is the mediæval; the Greek spirit is essentially modern.  The
introduction of the comparative method of research which has forced
history to disclose its secrets belongs in a measure to us.  Ours, too,
is a more scientific knowledge of philology and the method of survival.
Nor did the ancients know anything of the doctrine of averages or of
crucial instances, both of which methods have proved of such importance
in modern criticism, the one adding a most important proof of the
statical elements of history, and exemplifying the influences of all
physical surroundings on the life of man; the other, as in the single
instance of the Moulin Quignon skull, serving to create a whole new
science of prehistoric archæology and to bring us back to a time when man
was coeval with the stone age, the mammoth and the woolly rhinoceros.
But, except these, we have added no new canon or method to the science of
historical criticism.  Across the drear waste of a thousand years the
Greek and the modern spirit join hands.

In the torch race which the Greek boys ran from the Cerameician field of
death to the home of the goddess of Wisdom, not merely he who first
reached the goal but he also who first started with the torch aflame
received a prize.  In the Lampadephoria of civilisation and free thought
let us not forget to render due meed of honour to those who first lit
that sacred flame, the increasing splendour of which lights our footsteps
to the far-off divine event of the attainment of perfect truth.




THE ENGLISH RENAISSANCE OF ART


‘The English Renaissance of Art’ was delivered as a lecture for the first
time in the Chickering Hall, New York, on January 9, 1882.  A portion of
it was reported in the _New York Tribune_ on the following day and in
other American papers subsequently.  Since then this portion has been
reprinted, more or less accurately, from time to time, in unauthorised
editions.

There are in existence no less than four copies of the lecture, the
earliest of which is entirely in the author’s handwriting.  The others
are type-written and contain many corrections and additions made by the
author in manuscript.  These have all been collated and the text here
given contains, as nearly as possible, the lecture in the original form
as delivered by the author during his tour in the United States.

AMONG the many debts which we owe to the supreme æsthetic faculty of
Goethe is that he was the first to teach us to define beauty in terms the
most concrete possible, to realise it, I mean, always in its special
manifestations.  So, in the lecture which I have the honour to deliver
before you, I will not try to give you any abstract definition of
beauty—any such universal formula for it as was sought for by the
philosophy of the eighteenth century—still less to communicate to you
that which in its essence is incommunicable, the virtue by which a
particular picture or poem affects us with a unique and special joy; but
rather to point out to you the general ideas which characterise the great
English Renaissance of Art in this century, to discover their source, as
far as that is possible, and to estimate their future as far as that is
possible.

I call it our English Renaissance because it is indeed a sort of new
birth of the spirit of man, like the great Italian Renaissance of the
fifteenth century, in its desire for a more gracious and comely way of
life, its passion for physical beauty, its exclusive attention to form,
its seeking for new subjects for poetry, new forms of art, new
intellectual and imaginative enjoyments: and I call it our romantic
movement because it is our most recent expression of beauty.

It has been described as a mere revival of Greek modes of thought, and
again as a mere revival of mediæval feeling.  Rather I would say that to
these forms of the human spirit it has added whatever of artistic value
the intricacy and complexity and experience of modern life can give:
taking from the one its clearness of vision and its sustained calm, from
the other its variety of expression and the mystery of its vision.  For
what, as Goethe said, is the study of the ancients but a return to the
real world (for that is what they did); and what, said Mazzini, is
mediævalism but individuality?

It is really from the union of Hellenism, in its breadth, its sanity of
purpose, its calm possession of beauty, with the adventive, the
intensified individualism, the passionate colour of the romantic spirit,
that springs the art of the nineteenth century in England, as from the
marriage of Faust and Helen of Troy sprang the beautiful boy Euphorion.

Such expressions as ‘classical’ and ‘romantic’ are, it is true, often apt
to become the mere catchwords of schools.  We must always remember that
art has only one sentence to utter: there is for her only one high law,
the law of form or harmony—yet between the classical and romantic spirit
we may say that there lies this difference at least, that the one deals
with the type and the other with the exception.  In the work produced
under the modern romantic spirit it is no longer the permanent, the
essential truths of life that are treated of; it is the momentary
situation of the one, the momentary aspect of the other that art seeks to
render.  In sculpture, which is the type of one spirit, the subject
predominates over the situation; in painting, which is the type of the
other, the situation predominates over the subject.

There are two spirits, then: the Hellenic spirit and the spirit of
romance may be taken as forming the essential elements of our conscious
intellectual tradition, of our permanent standard of taste.  As regards
their origin, in art as in politics there is but one origin for all
revolutions, a desire on the part of man for a nobler form of life, for a
freer method and opportunity of expression.  Yet, I think that in
estimating the sensuous and intellectual spirit which presides over our
English Renaissance, any attempt to isolate it in any way from in the
progress and movement and social life of the age that has produced it
would be to rob it of its true vitality, possibly to mistake its true
meaning.  And in disengaging from the pursuits and passions of this
crowded modern world those passions and pursuits which have to do with
art and the love of art, we must take into account many great events of
history which seem to be the most opposed to any such artistic feeling.

Alien then from any wild, political passion, or from the harsh voice of a
rude people in revolt, as our English Renaissance must seem, in its
passionate cult of pure beauty, its flawless devotion to form, its
exclusive and sensitive nature, it is to the French Revolution that we
must look for the most primary factor of its production, the first
condition of its birth: that great Revolution of which we are all the
children though the voices of some of us be often loud against it; that
Revolution to which at a time when even such spirits as Coleridge and
Wordsworth lost heart in England, noble messages of love blown across
seas came from your young Republic.

It is true that our modern sense of the continuity of history has shown
us that neither in politics nor in nature are there revolutions ever but
evolutions only, and that the prelude to that wild storm which swept over
France in 1789 and made every king in Europe tremble for his throne, was
first sounded in literature years before the Bastille fell and the Palace
was taken.  The way for those red scenes by Seine and Loire was paved by
that critical spirit of Germany and England which accustomed men to bring
all things to the test of reason or utility or both, while the discontent
of the people in the streets of Paris was the echo that followed the life
of Emile and of Werther.  For Rousseau, by silent lake and mountain, had
called humanity back to the golden age that still lies before us and
preached a return to nature, in passionate eloquence whose music still
lingers about our keen northern air.  And Goethe and Scott had brought
romance back again from the prison she had lain in for so many
centuries—and what is romance but humanity?

Yet in the womb of the Revolution itself, and in the storm and terror of
that wild time, tendencies were hidden away that the artistic Renaissance
bent to her own service when the time came—a scientific tendency first,
which has borne in our own day a brood of somewhat noisy Titans, yet in
the sphere of poetry has not been unproductive of good.  I do not mean
merely in its adding to enthusiasm that intellectual basis which in its
strength, or that more obvious influence about which Wordsworth was
thinking when he said very nobly that poetry was merely the impassioned
expression in the face of science, and that when science would put on a
form of flesh and blood the poet would lend his divine spirit to aid the
transfiguration.  Nor do I dwell much on the great cosmical emotion and
deep pantheism of science to which Shelley has given its first and
Swinburne its latest glory of song, but rather on its influence on the
artistic spirit in preserving that close observation and the sense of
limitation as well as of clearness of vision which are the
characteristics of the real artist.

The great and golden rule of art as well as of life, wrote William Blake,
is that the more distinct, sharp and defined the boundary line, the more
perfect is the work of art; and the less keen and sharp the greater is
the evidence of weak imitation, plagiarism and bungling.  ‘Great
inventors in all ages knew this—Michael Angelo and Albert Durer are known
by this and by this alone’; and another time he wrote, with all the
simple directness of nineteenth-century prose, ‘to generalise is to be an
idiot.’

And this love of definite conception, this clearness of vision, this
artistic sense of limit, is the characteristic of all great work and
poetry; of the vision of Homer as of the vision of Dante, of Keats and
William Morris as of Chaucer and Theocritus.  It lies at the base of all
noble, realistic and romantic work as opposed to the colourless and empty
abstractions of our own eighteenth-century poets and of the classical
dramatists of France, or of the vague spiritualities of the German
sentimental school: opposed, too, to that spirit of transcendentalism
which also was root and flower itself of the great Revolution, underlying
the impassioned contemplation of Wordsworth and giving wings and fire to
the eagle-like flight of Shelley, and which in the sphere of philosophy,
though displaced by the materialism and positiveness of our day,
bequeathed two great schools of thought, the school of Newman to Oxford,
the school of Emerson to America.  Yet is this spirit of
transcendentalism alien to the spirit of art.  For the artist can accept
no sphere of life in exchange for life itself.  For him there is no
escape from the bondage of the earth: there is not even the desire of
escape.

He is indeed the only true realist: symbolism, which is the essence of
the transcendental spirit, is alien to him.  The metaphysical mind of
Asia will create for itself the monstrous, many-breasted idol of Ephesus,
but to the Greek, pure artist, that work is most instinct with spiritual
life which conforms most clearly to the perfect facts of physical life.

‘The storm of revolution,’ as Andre Chenier said, ‘blows out the torch of
poetry.’  It is not for some little time that the real influence of such
a wild cataclysm of things is felt: at first the desire for equality
seems to have produced personalities of more giant and Titan stature than
the world had ever known before.  Men heard the lyre of Byron and the
legions of Napoleon; it was a period of measureless passions and of
measureless despair; ambition, discontent, were the chords of life and
art; the age was an age of revolt: a phase through which the human spirit
must pass, but one in which it cannot rest.  For the aim of culture is
not rebellion but peace, the valley perilous where ignorant armies clash
by night being no dwelling-place meet for her to whom the gods have
assigned the fresh uplands and sunny heights and clear, untroubled air.

And soon that desire for perfection, which lay at the base of the
Revolution, found in a young English poet its most complete and flawless
realisation.

Phidias and the achievements of Greek art are foreshadowed in Homer:
Dante prefigures for us the passion and colour and intensity of Italian
painting: the modern love of landscape dates from Rousseau, and it is in
Keats that one discerns the beginning of the artistic renaissance of
England.

Byron was a rebel and Shelley a dreamer; but in the calmness and
clearness of his vision, his perfect self-control, his unerring sense of
beauty and his recognition of a separate realm for the imagination, Keats
was the pure and serene artist, the forerunner of the pre-Raphaelite
school, and so of the great romantic movement of which I am to speak.

Blake had indeed, before him, claimed for art a lofty, spiritual mission,
and had striven to raise design to the ideal level of poetry and music,
but the remoteness of his vision both in painting and poetry and the
incompleteness of his technical powers had been adverse to any real
influence.  It is in Keats that the artistic spirit of this century first
found its absolute incarnation.

And these pre-Raphaelites, what were they?  If you ask nine-tenths of the
British public what is the meaning of the word æsthetics, they will tell
you it is the French for affectation or the German for a dado; and if you
inquire about the pre-Raphaelites you will hear something about an
eccentric lot of young men to whom a sort of divine crookedness and holy
awkwardness in drawing were the chief objects of art.  To know nothing
about their great men is one of the necessary elements of English
education.

As regards the pre-Raphaelites the story is simple enough.  In the year
1847 a number of young men in London, poets and painters, passionate
admirers of Keats all of them, formed the habit of meeting together for
discussions on art, the result of such discussions being that the English
Philistine public was roused suddenly from its ordinary apathy by hearing
that there was in its midst a body of young men who had determined to
revolutionise English painting and poetry.  They called themselves the
pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.

In England, then as now, it was enough for a man to try and produce any
serious beautiful work to lose all his rights as a citizen; and besides
this, the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood—among whom the names of Dante
Rossetti, Holman Hunt and Millais will be familiar to you—had on their
side three things that the English public never forgives: youth, power
and enthusiasm.

Satire, always as sterile as it in shameful and as impotent as it is
insolent, paid them that usual homage which mediocrity pays to
genius—doing, here as always, infinite harm to the public, blinding them
to what is beautiful, teaching them that irreverence which is the source
of all vileness and narrowness of life, but harming the artist not at
all, rather confirming him in the perfect rightness of his work and
ambition.  For to disagree with three-fourths of the British public on
all points is one of the first elements of sanity, one of the deepest
consolations in all moments of spiritual doubt.

As regards the ideas these young men brought to the regeneration of
English art, we may see at the base of their artistic creations a desire
for a deeper spiritual value to be given to art as well as a more
decorative value.

Pre-Raphaelites they called themselves; not that they imitated the early
Italian masters at all, but that in their work, as opposed to the facile
abstractions of Raphael, they found a stronger realism of imagination, a
more careful realism of technique, a vision at once more fervent and more
vivid, an individuality more intimate and more intense.

For it is not enough that a work of art should conform to the æsthetic
demands of its age: there must be also about it, if it is to affect us
with any permanent delight, the impress of a distinct individuality, an
individuality remote from that of ordinary men, and coming near to us
only by virtue of a certain newness and wonder in the work, and through
channels whose very strangeness makes us more ready to give them welcome.

_La personnalité_, said one of the greatest of modern French critics,
_voilà ce qui nous sauvera_.

But above all things was it a return to Nature—that formula which seems
to suit so many and such diverse movements: they would draw and paint
nothing but what they saw, they would try and imagine things as they
really happened.  Later there came to the old house by Blackfriars
Bridge, where this young brotherhood used to meet and work, two young men
from Oxford, Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris—the latter
substituting for the simpler realism of the early days a more exquisite
spirit of choice, a more faultless devotion to beauty, a more intense
seeking for perfection: a master of all exquisite design and of all
spiritual vision.  It is of the school of Florence rather than of that of
Venice that he is kinsman, feeling that the close imitation of Nature is
a disturbing element in imaginative art.  The visible aspect of modern
life disturbs him not; rather is it for him to render eternal all that is
beautiful in Greek, Italian, and Celtic legend.  To Morris we owe poetry
whose perfect precision and clearness of word and vision has not been
excelled in the literature of our country, and by the revival of the
decorative arts he has given to our individualised romantic movement the
social idea and the social factor also.

But the revolution accomplished by this clique of young men, with
Ruskin’s faultless and fervent eloquence to help them, was not one of
ideas merely but of execution, not one of conceptions but of creations.

For the great eras in the history of the development of all the arts have
been eras not of increased feeling or enthusiasm in feeling for art, but
of new technical improvements primarily and specially.  The discovery of
marble quarries in the purple ravines of Pentelicus and on the little
low-lying hills of the island of Paros gave to the Greeks the opportunity
for that intensified vitality of action, that more sensuous and simple
humanism, to which the Egyptian sculptor working laboriously in the hard
porphyry and rose-coloured granite of the desert could not attain.  The
splendour of the Venetian school began with the introduction of the new
oil medium for painting.  The progress in modern music has been due to
the invention of new instruments entirely, and in no way to an increased
consciousness on the part of the musician of any wider social aim.  The
critic may try and trace the deferred resolutions of Beethoven {124} to
some sense of the incompleteness of the modern intellectual spirit, but
the artist would have answered, as one of them did afterwards, ‘Let them
pick out the fifths and leave us at peace.’

And so it is in poetry also: all this love of curious French metres like
the Ballade, the Villanelle, the Rondel; all this increased value laid on
elaborate alliterations, and on curious words and refrains, such as you
will find in Dante Rossetti and Swinburne, is merely the attempt to
perfect flute and viol and trumpet through which the spirit of the age
and the lips of the poet may blow the music of their many messages.

And so it has been with this romantic movement of ours: it is a reaction
against the empty conventional workmanship, the lax execution of previous
poetry and painting, showing itself in the work of such men as Rossetti
and Burne-Jones by a far greater splendour of colour, a far more
intricate wonder of design than English imaginative art has shown before.
In Rossetti’s poetry and the poetry of Morris, Swinburne and Tennyson a
perfect precision and choice of language, a style flawless and fearless,
a seeking for all sweet and precious melodies and a sustaining
consciousness of the musical value of each word are opposed to that value
which is merely intellectual.  In this respect they are one with the
romantic movement of France of which not the least characteristic note
was struck by Théophile Gautier’s advice to the young poet to read his
dictionary every day, as being the only book worth a poet’s reading.

While, then, the material of workmanship is being thus elaborated and
discovered to have in itself incommunicable and eternal qualities of its
own, qualities entirely satisfying to the poetic sense and not needing
for their æsthetic effect any lofty intellectual vision, any deep
criticism of life or even any passionate human emotion at all, the spirit
and the method of the poet’s working—what people call his
inspiration—have not escaped the controlling influence of the artistic
spirit.  Not that the imagination has lost its wings, but we have
accustomed ourselves to count their innumerable pulsations, to estimate
their limitless strength, to govern their ungovernable freedom.

To the Greeks this problem of the conditions of poetic production, and
the places occupied by either spontaneity or self-consciousness in any
artistic work, had a peculiar fascination.  We find it in the mysticism
of Plato and in the rationalism of Aristotle.  We find it later in the
Italian Renaissance agitating the minds of such men as Leonardo da Vinci.
Schiller tried to adjust the balance between form and feeling, and Goethe
to estimate the position of self-consciousness in art.  Wordsworth’s
definition of poetry as ‘emotion remembered in tranquillity’ may be taken
as an analysis of one of the stages through which all imaginative work
has to pass; and in Keats’s longing to be ‘able to compose without this
fever’ (I quote from one of his letters), his desire to substitute for
poetic ardour ‘a more thoughtful and quiet power,’ we may discern the
most important moment in the evolution of that artistic life.  The
question made an early and strange appearance in your literature too; and
I need not remind you how deeply the young poets of the French romantic
movement were excited and stirred by Edgar Allan Poe’s analysis of the
workings of his own imagination in the creating of that supreme
imaginative work which we know by the name of _The Raven_.

In the last century, when the intellectual and didactic element had
intruded to such an extent into the kingdom which belongs to poetry, it
was against the claims of the understanding that an artist like Goethe
had to protest.  ‘The more incomprehensible to the understanding a poem
is the better for it,’ he said once, asserting the complete supremacy of
the imagination in poetry as of reason in prose.  But in this century it
is rather against the claims of the emotional faculties, the claims of
mere sentiment and feeling, that the artist must react.  The simple
utterance of joy is not poetry any more than a mere personal cry of pain,
and the real experiences of the artist are always those which do not find
their direct expression but are gathered up and absorbed into some
artistic form which seems, from such real experiences, to be the farthest
removed and the most alien.

‘The heart contains passion but the imagination alone contains poetry,’
says Charles Baudelaire.  This too was the lesson that Théophile Gautier,
most subtle of all modern critics, most fascinating of all modern poets,
was never tired of teaching—‘Everybody is affected by a sunrise or a
sunset.’  The absolute distinction of the artist is not his capacity to
feel nature so much as his power of rendering it.  The entire
subordination of all intellectual and emotional faculties to the vital
and informing poetic principle is the surest sign of the strength of our
Renaissance.

We have seen the artistic spirit working, first in the delightful and
technical sphere of language, the sphere of expression as opposed to
subject, then controlling the imagination of the poet in dealing with his
subject.  And now I would point out to you its operation in the choice of
subject.  The recognition of a separate realm for the artist, a
consciousness of the absolute difference between the world of art and the
world of real fact, between classic grace and absolute reality, forms not
merely the essential element of any æsthetic charm but is the
characteristic of all great imaginative work and of all great eras of
artistic creation—of the age of Phidias as of the age of Michael Angelo,
of the age of Sophocles as of the age of Goethe.

Art never harms itself by keeping aloof from the social problems of the
day: rather, by so doing, it more completely realises for us that which
we desire.  For to most of us the real life is the life we do not lead,
and thus, remaining more true to the essence of its own perfection, more
jealous of its own unattainable beauty, is less likely to forget form in
feeling or to accept the passion of creation as any substitute for the
beauty of the created thing.

The artist is indeed the child of his own age, but the present will not
be to him a whit more real than the past; for, like the philosopher of
the Platonic vision, the poet is the spectator of all time and of all
existence.  For him no form is obsolete, no subject out of date; rather,
whatever of life and passion the world has known, in desert of Judæa or
in Arcadian valley, by the rivers of Troy or the rivers of Damascus, in
the crowded and hideous streets of a modern city or by the pleasant ways
of Camelot—all lies before him like an open scroll, all is still instinct
with beautiful life.  He will take of it what is salutary for his own
spirit, no more; choosing some facts and rejecting others with the calm
artistic control of one who is in possession of the secret of beauty.

There is indeed a poetical attitude to be adopted towards all things, but
all things are not fit subjects for poetry.  Into the secure and sacred
house of Beauty the true artist will admit nothing that is harsh or
disturbing, nothing that gives pain, nothing that is debatable, nothing
about which men argue.  He can steep himself, if he wishes, in the
discussion of all the social problems of his day, poor-laws and local
taxation, free trade and bimetallic currency, and the like; but when he
writes on these subjects it will be, as Milton nobly expressed it, with
his left hand, in prose and not in verse, in a pamphlet and not in a
lyric.  This exquisite spirit of artistic choice was not in Byron:
Wordsworth had it not.  In the work of both these men there is much that
we have to reject, much that does not give us that sense of calm and
perfect repose which should be the effect of all fine, imaginative work.
But in Keats it seemed to have been incarnate, and in his lovely _Ode on
a Grecian Urn_ it found its most secure and faultless expression; in the
pageant of the _Earthly Paradise_ and the knights and ladies of
Burne-Jones it is the one dominant note.

It is to no avail that the Muse of Poetry be called, even by such a
clarion note as Whitman’s, to migrate from Greece and Ionia and to
placard REMOVED and TO LET on the rocks of the snowy Parnassus.
Calliope’s call is not yet closed, nor are the epics of Asia ended; the
Sphinx is not yet silent, nor the fountain of Castaly dry.  For art is
very life itself and knows nothing of death; she is absolute truth and
takes no care of fact; she sees (as I remember Mr. Swinburne insisting on
at dinner) that Achilles is even now more actual and real than
Wellington, not merely more noble and interesting as a type and figure
but more positive and real.

Literature must rest always on a principle, and temporal considerations
are no principle at all.  For to the poet all times and places are one;
the stuff he deals with is eternal and eternally the same: no theme is
inept, no past or present preferable.  The steam whistle will not
affright him nor the flutes of Arcadia weary him: for him there is but
one time, the artistic moment; but one law, the law of form; but one
land, the land of Beauty—a land removed indeed from the real world and
yet more sensuous because more enduring; calm, yet with that calm which
dwells in the faces of the Greek statues, the calm which comes not from
the rejection but from the absorption of passion, the calm which despair
and sorrow cannot disturb but intensify only.  And so it comes that he
who seems to stand most remote from his age is he who mirrors it best,
because he has stripped life of what is accidental and transitory,
stripped it of that ‘mist of familiarity which makes life obscure to us.’

Those strange, wild-eyed sibyls fixed eternally in the whirlwind of
ecstasy, those mighty-limbed and Titan prophets, labouring with the
secret of the earth and the burden of mystery, that guard and glorify the
chapel of Pope Sixtus at Rome—do they not tell us more of the real spirit
of the Italian Renaissance, of the dream of Savonarola and of the sin of
Borgia, than all the brawling boors and cooking women of Dutch art can
teach us of the real spirit of the history of Holland?

And so in our own day, also, the two most vital tendencies of the
nineteenth century—the democratic and pantheistic tendency and the
tendency to value life for the sake of art—found their most complete and
perfect utterance in the poetry of Shelley and Keats who, to the blind
eyes of their own time, seemed to be as wanderers in the wilderness,
preachers of vague or unreal things.  And I remember once, in talking to
Mr. Burne-Jones about modern science, his saying to me, ‘the more
materialistic science becomes, the more angels shall I paint: their wings
are my protest in favour of the immortality of the soul.’

But these are the intellectual speculations that underlie art.  Where in
the arts themselves are we to find that breadth of human sympathy which
is the condition of all noble work; where in the arts are we to look for
what Mazzini would call the social ideas as opposed to the merely
personal ideas?  By virtue of what claim do I demand for the artist the
love and loyalty of the men and women of the world?  I think I can answer
that.

Whatever spiritual message an artist brings to his aid is a matter for
his own soul.  He may bring judgment like Michael Angelo or peace like
Angelico; he may come with mourning like the great Athenian or with mirth
like the singer of Sicily; nor is it for us to do aught but accept his
teaching, knowing that we cannot smite the bitter lips of Leopardi into
laughter or burden with our discontent Goethe’s serene calm.  But for
warrant of its truth such message must have the flame of eloquence in the
lips that speak it, splendour and glory in the vision that is its
witness, being justified by one thing only—the flawless beauty and
perfect form of its expression: this indeed being the social idea, being
the meaning of joy in art.

Not laughter where none should laugh, nor the calling of peace where
there is no peace; not in painting the subject ever, but the pictorial
charm only, the wonder of its colour, the satisfying beauty of its
design.

You have most of you seen, probably, that great masterpiece of Rubens
which hangs in the gallery of Brussels, that swift and wonderful pageant
of horse and rider arrested in its most exquisite and fiery moment when
the winds are caught in crimson banner and the air lit by the gleam of
armour and the flash of plume.  Well, that is joy in art, though that
golden hillside be trodden by the wounded feet of Christ and it is for
the death of the Son of Man that that gorgeous cavalcade is passing.

But this restless modern intellectual spirit of ours is not receptive
enough of the sensuous element of art; and so the real influence of the
arts is hidden from many of us: only a few, escaping from the tyranny of
the soul, have learned the secret of those high hours when thought is
not.

And this indeed is the reason of the influence which Eastern art is
having on us in Europe, and of the fascination of all Japanese work.
While the Western world has been laying on art the intolerable burden of
its own intellectual doubts and the spiritual tragedy of its own sorrows,
the East has always kept true to art’s primary and pictorial conditions.

In judging of a beautiful statue the æsthetic faculty is absolutely and
completely gratified by the splendid curves of those marble lips that are
dumb to our complaint, the noble modelling of those limbs that are
powerless to help us.  In its primary aspect a painting has no more
spiritual message or meaning than an exquisite fragment of Venetian glass
or a blue tile from the wall of Damascus: it is a beautifully coloured
surface, nothing more.  The channels by which all noble imaginative work
in painting should touch, and do touch the soul, are not those of the
truths of life, nor metaphysical truths.  But that pictorial charm which
does not depend on any literary reminiscence for its effect on the one
hand, nor is yet a mere result of communicable technical skill on the
other, comes of a certain inventive and creative handling of colour.
Nearly always in Dutch painting and often in the works of Giorgione or
Titian, it is entirely independent of anything definitely poetical in the
subject, a kind of form and choice in workmanship which is itself
entirely satisfying, and is (as the Greeks would say) an end in itself.

And so in poetry too, the real poetical quality, the joy of poetry, comes
never from the subject but from an inventive handling of rhythmical
language, from what Keats called the ‘sensuous life of verse.’  The
element of song in the singing accompanied by the profound joy of motion,
is so sweet that, while the incomplete lives of ordinary men bring no
healing power with them, the thorn-crown of the poet will blossom into
roses for our pleasure; for our delight his despair will gild its own
thorns, and his pain, like Adonis, be beautiful in its agony; and when
the poet’s heart breaks it will break in music.

And health in art—what is that?  It has nothing to do with a sane
criticism of life.  There is more health in Baudelaire than there is in
[Kingsley].  Health is the artist’s recognition of the limitations of the
form in which he works.  It is the honour and the homage which he gives
to the material he uses—whether it be language with its glories, or
marble or pigment with their glories—knowing that the true brotherhood of
the arts consists not in their borrowing one another’s method, but in
their producing, each of them by its own individual means, each of them
by keeping its objective limits, the same unique artistic delight.  The
delight is like that given to us by music—for music is the art in which
form and matter are always one, the art whose subject cannot be separated
from the method of its expression, the art which most completely realises
the artistic ideal, and is the condition to which all the other arts are
constantly aspiring.

And criticism—what place is that to have in our culture?  Well, I think
that the first duty of an art critic is to hold his tongue at all times,
and upon all subjects: _C’est un grand avantage de n’avoir rien fait_,
_mais il ne faut pas en abuser_.

It is only through the mystery of creation that one can gain any
knowledge of the quality of created things.  You have listened to
_Patience_ for a hundred nights and you have heard me for one only.  It
will make, no doubt, that satire more piquant by knowing something about
the subject of it, but you must not judge of æstheticism by the satire of
Mr. Gilbert.  As little should you judge of the strength and splendour of
sun or sea by the dust that dances in the beam, or the bubble that breaks
on the wave, as take your critic for any sane test of art.  For the
artists, like the Greek gods, are revealed only to one another, as
Emerson says somewhere; their real value and place time only can show.
In this respect also omnipotence is with the ages.  The true critic
addresses not the artist ever but the public only.  His work lies with
them.  Art can never have any other claim but her own perfection: it is
for the critic to create for art the social aim, too, by teaching the
people the spirit in which they are to approach all artistic work, the
love they are to give it, the lesson they are to draw from it.

All these appeals to art to set herself more in harmony with modern
progress and civilisation, and to make herself the mouthpiece for the
voice of humanity, these appeals to art ‘to have a mission,’ are appeals
which should be made to the public.  The art which has fulfilled the
conditions of beauty has fulfilled all conditions: it is for the critic
to teach the people how to find in the calm of such art the highest
expression of their own most stormy passions.  ‘I have no reverence,’
said Keats, ‘for the public, nor for anything in existence but the
Eternal Being, the memory of great men and the principle of Beauty.’

Such then is the principle which I believe to be guiding and underlying
our English Renaissance, a Renaissance many-sided and wonderful,
productive of strong ambitions and lofty personalities, yet for all its
splendid achievements in poetry and in the decorative arts and in
painting, for all the increased comeliness and grace of dress, and the
furniture of houses and the like, not complete.  For there can be no
great sculpture without a beautiful national life, and the commercial
spirit of England has killed that; no great drama without a noble
national life, and the commercial spirit of England has killed that too.

It is not that the flawless serenity of marble cannot bear the burden of
the modern intellectual spirit, or become instinct with the fire of
romantic passion—the tomb of Duke Lorenzo and the chapel of the Medici
show us that—but it is that, as Théophile Gautier used to say, the
visible world is dead, _le monde visible a disparu_.

Nor is it again that the novel has killed the play, as some critics would
persuade us—the romantic movement of France shows us that.  The work of
Balzac and of Hugo grew up side by side together; nay, more, were
complementary to each other, though neither of them saw it.  While all
other forms of poetry may flourish in an ignoble age, the splendid
individualism of the lyrist, fed by its own passion, and lit by its own
power, may pass as a pillar of fire as well across the desert as across
places that are pleasant.  It is none the less glorious though no man
follow it—nay, by the greater sublimity of its loneliness it may be
quickened into loftier utterance and intensified into clearer song.  From
the mean squalor of the sordid life that limits him, the dreamer or the
idyllist may soar on poesy’s viewless wings, may traverse with fawn-skin
and spear the moonlit heights of Cithæron though Faun and Bassarid dance
there no more.  Like Keats he may wander through the old-world forests of
Latmos, or stand like Morris on the galley’s deck with the Viking when
king and galley have long since passed away.  But the drama is the
meeting-place of art and life; it deals, as Mazzini said, not merely with
man, but with social man, with man in his relation to God and to
Humanity.  It is the product of a period of great national united energy;
it is impossible without a noble public, and belongs to such ages as the
age of Elizabeth in London and of Pericles at Athens; it is part of such
lofty moral and spiritual ardour as came to Greek after the defeat of the
Persian fleet, and to Englishman after the wreck of the Armada of Spain.

Shelley felt how incomplete our movement was in this respect, and has
shown in one great tragedy by what terror and pity he would have purified
our age; but in spite of _The Cenci_ the drama is one of the artistic
forms through which the genius of the England of this century seeks in
vain to find outlet and expression.  He has had no worthy imitators.

It is rather, perhaps, to you that we should turn to complete and perfect
this great movement of ours, for there is something Hellenic in your air
and world, something that has a quicker breath of the joy and power of
Elizabeth’s England about it than our ancient civilisation can give us.
For you, at least, are young; ‘no hungry generations tread you down,’ and
the past does not weary you with the intolerable burden of its memories
nor mock you with the ruins of a beauty, the secret of whose creation you
have lost.  That very absence of tradition, which Mr. Ruskin thought
would rob your rivers of their laughter and your flowers of their light,
may be rather the source of your freedom and your strength.

To speak in literature with the perfect rectitude and insouciance of the
movements of animals, and the unimpeachableness of the sentiment of trees
in the woods and grass by the roadside, has been defined by one of your
poets as a flawless triumph of art.  It is a triumph which you above all
nations may be destined to achieve.  For the voices that have their
dwelling in sea and mountain are not the chosen music of Liberty only;
other messages are there in the wonder of wind-swept height and the
majesty of silent deep—messages that, if you will but listen to them, may
yield you the splendour of some new imagination, the marvel of some new
beauty.

‘I foresee,’ said Goethe, ‘the dawn of a new literature which all people
may claim as their own, for all have contributed to its foundation.’  If,
then, this is so, and if the materials for a civilisation as great as
that of Europe lie all around you, what profit, you will ask me, will all
this study of our poets and painters be to you?  I might answer that the
intellect can be engaged without direct didactic object on an artistic
and historical problem; that the demand of the intellect is merely to
feel itself alive; that nothing which has ever interested men or women
can cease to be a fit subject for culture.

I might remind you of what all Europe owes to the sorrow of a single
Florentine in exile at Verona, or to the love of Petrarch by that little
well in Southern France; nay, more, how even in this dull, materialistic
age the simple expression of an old man’s simple life, passed away from
the clamour of great cities amid the lakes and misty hills of Cumberland,
has opened out for England treasures of new joy compared with which the
treasures of her luxury are as barren as the sea which she has made her
highway, and as bitter as the fire which she would make her slave.

But I think it will bring you something besides this, something that is
the knowledge of real strength in art: not that you should imitate the
works of these men; but their artistic spirit, their artistic attitude, I
think you should absorb that.

For in nations, as in individuals, if the passion for creation be not
accompanied by the critical, the æsthetic faculty also, it will be sure
to waste its strength aimlessly, failing perhaps in the artistic spirit
of choice, or in the mistaking of feeling for form, or in the following
of false ideals.

For the various spiritual forms of the imagination have a natural
affinity with certain sensuous forms of art—and to discern the qualities
of each art, to intensify as well its limitations as its powers of
expression, is one of the aims that culture sets before us.  It is not an
increased moral sense, an increased moral supervision that your
literature needs.  Indeed, one should never talk of a moral or an immoral
poem—poems are either well written or badly written, that is all.  And,
indeed, any element of morals or implied reference to a standard of good
or evil in art is often a sign of a certain incompleteness of vision,
often a note of discord in the harmony of an imaginative creation; for
all good work aims at a purely artistic effect.  ‘We must be careful,’
said Goethe, ‘not to be always looking for culture merely in what is
obviously moral.  Everything that is great promotes civilisation as soon
as we are aware of it.’

But, as in your cities so in your literature, it is a permanent canon and
standard of taste, an increased sensibility to beauty (if I may say so)
that is lacking.  All noble work is not national merely, but universal.
The political independence of a nation must not be confused with any
intellectual isolation.  The spiritual freedom, indeed, your own generous
lives and liberal air will give you.  From us you will learn the
classical restraint of form.

For all great art is delicate art, roughness having very little to do
with strength, and harshness very little to do with power.  ‘The artist,’
as Mr. Swinburne says, ‘must be perfectly articulate.’

This limitation is for the artist perfect freedom: it is at once the
origin and the sign of his strength.  So that all the supreme masters of
style—Dante, Sophocles, Shakespeare—are the supreme masters of spiritual
and intellectual vision also.

Love art for its own sake, and then all things that you need will be
added to you.

This devotion to beauty and to the creation of beautiful things is the
test of all great civilised nations.  Philosophy may teach us to bear
with equanimity the misfortunes of our neighbours, and science resolve
the moral sense into a secretion of sugar, but art is what makes the life
of each citizen a sacrament and not a speculation, art is what makes the
life of the whole race immortal.

For beauty is the only thing that time cannot harm.  Philosophies fall
away like sand, and creeds follow one another like the withered leaves of
autumn; but what is beautiful is a joy for all seasons and a possession
for all eternity.

Wars and the clash of armies and the meeting of men in battle by trampled
field or leaguered city, and the rising of nations there must always be.
But I think that art, by creating a common intellectual atmosphere
between all countries, might—if it could not overshadow the world with
the silver wings of peace—at least make men such brothers that they would
not go out to slay one another for the whim or folly of some king or
minister, as they do in Europe.  Fraternity would come no more with the
hands of Cain, nor Liberty betray freedom with the kiss of Anarchy; for
national hatreds are always strongest where culture is lowest.

‘How could I?’ said Goethe, when reproached for not writing like Korner
against the French.  ‘How could I, to whom barbarism and culture alone
are of importance, hate a nation which is among the most cultivated of
the earth, a nation to which I owe a great part of my own cultivation?’

Mighty empires, too, there must always be as long as personal ambition
and the spirit of the age are one, but art at least is the only empire
which a nation’s enemies cannot take from her by conquest, but which is
taken by submission only.  The sovereignty of Greece and Rome is not yet
passed away, though the gods of the one be dead and the eagles of the
other tired.

And we in our Renaissance are seeking to create a sovereignty that will
still be England’s when her yellow leopards have grown weary of wars and
the rose of her shield is crimsoned no more with the blood of battle; and
you, too, absorbing into the generous heart of a great people this
pervading artistic spirit, will create for yourselves such riches as you
have never yet created, though your land be a network of railways and
your cities the harbours for the galleys of the world.

I know, indeed, that the divine natural prescience of beauty which is the
inalienable inheritance of Greek and Italian is not our inheritance.  For
such an informing and presiding spirit of art to shield us from all harsh
and alien influences, we of the Northern races must turn rather to that
strained self-consciousness of our age which, as it is the key-note of
all our romantic art, must be the source of all or nearly all our
culture.  I mean that intellectual curiosity of the nineteenth century
which is always looking for the secret of the life that still lingers
round old and bygone forms of culture.  It takes from each what is
serviceable for the modern spirit—from Athens its wonder without its
worship, from Venice its splendour without its sin.  The same spirit is
always analysing its own strength and its own weakness, counting what it
owes to East and to West, to the olive-trees of Colonus and to the
palm-trees of Lebanon, to Gethsemane and to the garden of Proserpine.

And yet the truths of art cannot be taught: they are revealed only,
revealed to natures which have made themselves receptive of all beautiful
impressions by the study and worship of all beautiful things.  And hence
the enormous importance given to the decorative arts in our English
Renaissance; hence all that marvel of design that comes from the hand of
Edward Burne-Jones, all that weaving of tapestry and staining of glass,
that beautiful working in clay and metal and wood which we owe to William
Morris, the greatest handicraftsman we have had in England since the
fourteenth century.

So, in years to come there will be nothing in any man’s house which has
not given delight to its maker and does not give delight to its user.
The children, like the children of Plato’s perfect city, will grow up ‘in
a simple atmosphere of all fair things’—I quote from the passage in the
_Republic_—‘a simple atmosphere of all fair things, where beauty, which
is the spirit of art, will come on eye and ear like a fresh breath of
wind that brings health from a clear upland, and insensibly and gradually
draw the child’s soul into harmony with all knowledge and all wisdom, so
that he will love what is beautiful and good, and hate what is evil and
ugly (for they always go together) long before he knows the reason why;
and then when reason comes will kiss her on the cheek as a friend.’

That is what Plato thought decorative art could do for a nation, feeling
that the secret not of philosophy merely but of all gracious existence
might be externally hidden from any one whose youth had been passed in
uncomely and vulgar surroundings, and that the beauty of form and colour
even, as he says, in the meanest vessels of the house, will find its way
into the inmost places of the soul and lead the boy naturally to look for
that divine harmony of spiritual life of which art was to him the
material symbol and warrant.

Prelude indeed to all knowledge and all wisdom will this love of
beautiful things be for us; yet there are times when wisdom becomes a
burden and knowledge is one with sorrow: for as every body has its shadow
so every soul has its scepticism.  In such dread moments of discord and
despair where should we, of this torn and troubled age, turn our steps if
not to that secure house of beauty where there is always a little
forgetfulness, always a great joy; to that _città divina_, as the old
Italian heresy called it, the divine city where one can stand, though
only for a brief moment, apart from the division and terror of the world
and the choice of the world too?

This is that _consolation des arts_ which is the key-note of Gautier’s
poetry, the secret of modern life foreshadowed—as indeed what in our
century is not?—by Goethe.  You remember what he said to the German
people: ‘Only have the courage,’ he said, ‘to give yourselves up to your
impressions, allow yourselves to be delighted, moved, elevated, nay
instructed, inspired for something great.’  The courage to give
yourselves up to your impressions: yes, that is the secret of the
artistic life—for while art has been defined as an escape from the
tyranny of the senses, it is an escape rather from the tyranny of the
soul.  But only to those who worship her above all things does she ever
reveal her true treasure: else will she be as powerless to aid you as the
mutilated Venus of the Louvre was before the romantic but sceptical
nature of Heine.

And indeed I think it would be impossible to overrate the gain that might
follow if we had about us only what gave pleasure to the maker of it and
gives pleasure to its user, that being the simplest of all rules about
decoration.  One thing, at least, I think it would do for us: there is no
surer test of a great country than how near it stands to its own poets;
but between the singers of our day and the workers to whom they would
sing there seems to be an ever-widening and dividing chasm, a chasm which
slander and mockery cannot traverse, but which is spanned by the luminous
wings of love.

And of such love I think that the abiding presence in our houses of noble
imaginative work would be the surest seed and preparation.  I do not mean
merely as regards that direct literary expression of art by which, from
the little red-and-black cruse of oil or wine, a Greek boy could learn of
the lionlike splendour of Achilles, of the strength of Hector and the
beauty of Paris and the wonder of Helen, long before he stood and
listened in crowded market-place or in theatre of marble; or by which an
Italian child of the fifteenth century could know of the chastity of
Lucrece and the death of Camilla from carven doorway and from painted
chest.  For the good we get from art is not what we learn from it; it is
what we become through it.  Its real influence will be in giving the mind
that enthusiasm which is the secret of Hellenism, accustoming it to
demand from art all that art can do in rearranging the facts of common
life for us—whether it be by giving the most spiritual interpretation of
one’s own moments of highest passion or the most sensuous expression of
those thoughts that are the farthest removed from sense; in accustoming
it to love the things of the imagination for their own sake, and to
desire beauty and grace in all things.  For he who does not love art in
all things does not love it at all, and he who does not need art in all
things does not need it at all.

I will not dwell here on what I am sure has delighted you all in our
great Gothic cathedrals.  I mean how the artist of that time,
handicraftsman himself in stone or glass, found the best motives for his
art, always ready for his hand and always beautiful, in the daily work of
the artificers he saw around him—as in those lovely windows of
Chartres—where the dyer dips in the vat and the potter sits at the wheel,
and the weaver stands at the loom: real manufacturers these, workers with
the hand, and entirely delightful to look at, not like the smug and vapid
shopman of our time, who knows nothing of the web or vase he sells,
except that he is charging you double its value and thinking you a fool
for buying it.  Nor can I but just note, in passing, the immense
influence the decorative work of Greece and Italy had on its artists, the
one teaching the sculptor that restraining influence of design which is
the glory of the Parthenon, the other keeping painting always true to its
primary, pictorial condition of noble colour which is the secret of the
school of Venice; for I wish rather, in this lecture at least, to dwell
on the effect that decorative art has on human life—on its social not its
purely artistic effect.

There are two kinds of men in the world, two great creeds, two different
forms of natures: men to whom the end of life is action, and men to whom
the end of life is thought.  As regards the latter, who seek for
experience itself and not for the fruits of experience, who must burn
always with one of the passions of this fiery-coloured world, who find
life interesting not for its secret but for its situations, for its
pulsations and not for its purpose; the passion for beauty engendered by
the decorative arts will be to them more satisfying than any political or
religious enthusiasm, any enthusiasm for humanity, any ecstasy or sorrow
for love.  For art comes to one professing primarily to give nothing but
the highest quality to one’s moments, and for those moments’ sake.  So
far for those to whom the end of life is thought.  As regards the others,
who hold that life is inseparable from labour, to them should this
movement be specially dear: for, if our days are barren without industry,
industry without art is barbarism.

Hewers of wood and drawers of water there must be always indeed among us.
Our modern machinery has not much lightened the labour of man after all:
but at least let the pitcher that stands by the well be beautiful and
surely the labour of the day will be lightened: let the wood be made
receptive of some lovely form, some gracious design, and there will come
no longer discontent but joy to the toiler.  For what is decoration but
the worker’s expression of joy in his work?  And not joy merely—that is a
great thing yet not enough—but that opportunity of expressing his own
individuality which, as it is the essence of all life, is the source of
all art.  ‘I have tried,’ I remember William Morris saying to me once, ‘I
have tried to make each of my workers an artist, and when I say an artist
I mean a man.’  For the worker then, handicraftsman of whatever kind he
is, art is no longer to be a purple robe woven by a slave and thrown over
the whitened body of a leprous king to hide and to adorn the sin of his
luxury, but rather the beautiful and noble expression of a life that has
in it something beautiful and noble.

And so you must seek out your workman and give him, as far as possible,
the right surroundings, for remember that the real test and virtue of a
workman is not his earnestness nor his industry even, but his power of
design merely; and that ‘design is not the offspring of idle fancy: it is
the studied result of accumulative observation and delightful habit.’
All the teaching in the world is of no avail if you do not surround your
workman with happy influences and with beautiful things.  It is
impossible for him to have right ideas about colour unless he sees the
lovely colours of Nature unspoiled; impossible for him to supply
beautiful incident and action unless he sees beautiful incident and
action in the world about him.

For to cultivate sympathy you must be among living things and thinking
about them, and to cultivate admiration you must be among beautiful
things and looking at them.  ‘The steel of Toledo and the silk of Genoa
did but give strength to oppression and lustre to pride,’ as Mr. Ruskin
says; let it be for you to create an art that is made by the hands of the
people for the joy of the people, to please the hearts of the people,
too; an art that will be your expression of your delight in life.  There
is nothing ‘in common life too mean, in common things too trivial to be
ennobled by your touch’; nothing in life that art cannot sanctify.

You have heard, I think, a few of you, of two flowers connected with the
æsthetic movement in England, and said (I assure you, erroneously) to be
the food of some æsthetic young men.  Well, let me tell you that the
reason we love the lily and the sunflower, in spite of what Mr. Gilbert
may tell you, is not for any vegetable fashion at all.  It is because
these two lovely flowers are in England the two most perfect models of
design, the most naturally adapted for decorative art—the gaudy leonine
beauty of the one and the precious loveliness of the other giving to the
artist the most entire and perfect joy.  And so with you: let there be no
flower in your meadows that does not wreathe its tendrils around your
pillows, no little leaf in your Titan forests that does not lend its form
to design, no curving spray of wild rose or brier that does not live for
ever in carven arch or window or marble, no bird in your air that is not
giving the iridescent wonder of its colour, the exquisite curves of its
wings in flight, to make more precious the preciousness of simple
adornment.

We spend our days, each one of us, in looking for the secret of life.
Well, the secret of life is in art.




HOUSE DECORATION


A lecture delivered in America during Wilde’s tour in 1882.  It was
announced as a lecture on ‘The Practical Application of the Principles of
Æsthetic Theory to Exterior and Interior House Decoration, With
Observations upon Dress and Personal Ornaments.’  The earliest date on
which it is known to have been given is May 11, 1882.

IN my last lecture I gave you something of the history of Art in England.
I sought to trace the influence of the French Revolution upon its
development.  I said something of the song of Keats and the school of the
pre-Raphaelites.  But I do not want to shelter the movement, which I have
called the English Renaissance, under any palladium however noble, or any
name however revered.  The roots of it have, indeed, to be sought for in
things that have long passed away, and not, as some suppose, in the fancy
of a few young men—although I am not altogether sure that there is
anything much better than the fancy of a few young men.

When I appeared before you on a previous occasion, I had seen nothing of
American art save the Doric columns and Corinthian chimney-pots visible
on your Broadway and Fifth Avenue.  Since then, I have been through your
country to some fifty or sixty different cities, I think.  I find that
what your people need is not so much high imaginative art but that which
hallows the vessels of everyday use.  I suppose that the poet will sing
and the artist will paint regardless whether the world praises or blames.
He has his own world and is independent of his fellow-men.  But the
handicraftsman is dependent on your pleasure and opinion.  He needs your
encouragement and he must have beautiful surroundings.  Your people love
art but do not sufficiently honour the handicraftsman.  Of course, those
millionaires who can pillage Europe for their pleasure need have no care
to encourage such; but I speak for those whose desire for beautiful
things is larger than their means.  I find that one great trouble all
over is that your workmen are not given to noble designs.  You cannot be
indifferent to this, because Art is not something which you can take or
leave.  It is a necessity of human life.

And what is the meaning of this beautiful decoration which we call art?
In the first place, it means value to the workman and it means the
pleasure which he must necessarily take in making a beautiful thing.  The
mark of all good art is not that the thing done is done exactly or
finely, for machinery may do as much, but that it is worked out with the
head and the workman’s heart.  I cannot impress the point too frequently
that beautiful and rational designs are necessary in all work.  I did not
imagine, until I went into some of your simpler cities, that there was so
much bad work done.  I found, where I went, bad wall-papers horribly
designed, and coloured carpets, and that old offender the horse-hair
sofa, whose stolid look of indifference is always so depressing.  I found
meaningless chandeliers and machine-made furniture, generally of
rosewood, which creaked dismally under the weight of the ubiquitous
interviewer.  I came across the small iron stove which they always
persist in decorating with machine-made ornaments, and which is as great
a bore as a wet day or any other particularly dreadful institution.  When
unusual extravagance was indulged in, it was garnished with two funeral
urns.

It must always be remembered that what is well and carefully made by an
honest workman, after a rational design, increases in beauty and value as
the years go on.  The old furniture brought over by the Pilgrims, two
hundred years ago, which I saw in New England, is just as good and as
beautiful to-day as it was when it first came here.  Now, what you must
do is to bring artists and handicraftsmen together.  Handicraftsmen
cannot live, certainly cannot thrive, without such companionship.
Separate these two and you rob art of all spiritual motive.

Having done this, you must place your workman in the midst of beautiful
surroundings.  The artist is not dependent on the visible and the
tangible.  He has his visions and his dreams to feed on.  But the workman
must see lovely forms as he goes to his work in the morning and returns
at eventide.  And, in connection with this, I want to assure you that
noble and beautiful designs are never the result of idle fancy or
purposeless day-dreaming.  They come only as the accumulation of habits
of long and delightful observation.  And yet such things may not be
taught.  Right ideas concerning them can certainly be obtained only by
those who have been accustomed to rooms that are beautiful and colours
that are satisfying.

Perhaps one of the most difficult things for us to do is to choose a
notable and joyous dress for men.  There would be more joy in life if we
were to accustom ourselves to use all the beautiful colours we can in
fashioning our own clothes.  The dress of the future, I think, will use
drapery to a great extent and will abound with joyous colour.  At present
we have lost all nobility of dress and, in doing so, have almost
annihilated the modern sculptor.  And, in looking around at the figures
which adorn our parks, one could almost wish that we had completely
killed the noble art.  To see the frock-coat of the drawing-room done in
bronze, or the double waistcoat perpetuated in marble, adds a new horror
to death.  But indeed, in looking through the history of costume, seeking
an answer to the questions we have propounded, there is little that is
either beautiful or appropriate.  One of the earliest forms is the Greek
drapery which is exquisite for young girls.  And then, I think we may be
pardoned a little enthusiasm over the dress of the time of Charles I., so
beautiful indeed, that in spite of its invention being with the Cavaliers
it was copied by the Puritans.  And the dress for the children of that
time must not be passed over.  It was a very golden age of the little
ones.  I do not think that they have ever looked so lovely as they do in
the pictures of that time.  The dress of the last century in England is
also peculiarly gracious and graceful.  There is nothing bizarre or
strange about it, but it is full of harmony and beauty.  In these days,
when we have suffered dreadfully from the incursions of the modern
milliner, we hear ladies boast that they do not wear a dress more than
once.  In the old days, when the dresses were decorated with beautiful
designs and worked with exquisite embroidery, ladies rather took a pride
in bringing out the garment and wearing it many times and handing it down
to their daughters—a process that would, I think, be quite appreciated by
a modern husband when called upon to settle his wife’s bills.

And how shall men dress?  Men say that they do not particularly care how
they dress, and that it is little matter.  I am bound to reply that I do
not think that you do.  In all my journeys through the country, the only
well-dressed men that I saw—and in saying this I earnestly deprecate the
polished indignation of your Fifth Avenue dandies—were the Western
miners.  Their wide-brimmed hats, which shaded their faces from the sun
and protected them from the rain, and the cloak, which is by far the most
beautiful piece of drapery ever invented, may well be dwelt on with
admiration.  Their high boots, too, were sensible and practical.  They
wore only what was comfortable, and therefore beautiful.  As I looked at
them I could not help thinking with regret of the time when these
picturesque miners would have made their fortunes and would go East to
assume again all the abominations of modern fashionable attire.  Indeed,
so concerned was I that I made some of them promise that when they again
appeared in the more crowded scenes of Eastern civilisation they would
still continue to wear their lovely costume.  But I do not believe they
will.

Now, what America wants to-day is a school of rational art.  Bad art is a
great deal worse than no art at all.  You must show your workmen
specimens of good work so that they come to know what is simple and true
and beautiful.  To that end I would have you have a museum attached to
these schools—not one of those dreadful modern institutions where there
is a stuffed and very dusty giraffe, and a case or two of fossils, but a
place where there are gathered examples of art decoration from various
periods and countries.  Such a place is the South Kensington Museum in
London, whereon we build greater hopes for the future than on any other
one thing.  There I go every Saturday night, when the museum is open
later than usual, to see the handicraftsman, the wood-worker, the
glass-blower and the worker in metals.  And it is here that the man of
refinement and culture comes face to face with the workman who ministers
to his joy.  He comes to know more of the nobility of the workman, and
the workman, feeling the appreciation, comes to know more of the nobility
of his work.

You have too many white walls.  More colour is wanted.  You should have
such men as Whistler among you to teach you the beauty and joy of colour.
Take Mr. Whistler’s ‘Symphony in White,’ which you no doubt have imagined
to be something quite bizarre.  It is nothing of the sort.  Think of a
cool grey sky flecked here and there with white clouds, a grey ocean and
three wonderfully beautiful figures robed in white, leaning over the
water and dropping white flowers from their fingers.  Here is no
extensive intellectual scheme to trouble you, and no metaphysics of which
we have had quite enough in art.  But if the simple and unaided colour
strike the right key-note, the whole conception is made clear.  I regard
Mr. Whistler’s famous Peacock Room as the finest thing in colour and art
decoration which the world has known since Correggio painted that
wonderful room in Italy where the little children are dancing on the
walls.  Mr. Whistler finished another room just before I came away—a
breakfast room in blue and yellow.  The ceiling was a light blue, the
cabinet-work and the furniture were of a yellow wood, the curtains at the
windows were white and worked in yellow, and when the table was set for
breakfast with dainty blue china nothing can be conceived at once so
simple and so joyous.

The fault which I have observed in most of your rooms is that there is
apparent no definite scheme of colour.  Everything is not attuned to a
key-note as it should be.  The apartments are crowded with pretty things
which have no relation to one another.  Again, your artists must decorate
what is more simply useful.  In your art schools I found no attempt to
decorate such things as the vessels for water.  I know of nothing uglier
than the ordinary jug or pitcher.  A museum could be filled with the
different kinds of water vessels which are used in hot countries.  Yet we
continue to submit to the depressing jug with the handle all on one side.
I do not see the wisdom of decorating dinner-plates with sunsets and
soup-plates with moonlight scenes.  I do not think it adds anything to
the pleasure of the canvas-back duck to take it out of such glories.
Besides, we do not want a soup-plate whose bottom seems to vanish in the
distance.  One feels neither safe nor comfortable under such conditions.
In fact, I did not find in the art schools of the country that the
difference was explained between decorative and imaginative art.

The conditions of art should be simple.  A great deal more depends upon
the heart than upon the head.  Appreciation of art is not secured by any
elaborate scheme of learning.  Art requires a good healthy atmosphere.
The motives for art are still around about us as they were round about
the ancients.  And the subjects are also easily found by the earnest
sculptor and the painter.  Nothing is more picturesque and graceful than
a man at work.  The artist who goes to the children’s playground, watches
them at their sport and sees the boy stoop to tie his shoe, will find the
same themes that engaged the attention of the ancient Greeks, and such
observation and the illustrations which follow will do much to correct
that foolish impression that mental and physical beauty are always
divorced.

To you, more than perhaps to any other country, has Nature been generous
in furnishing material for art workers to work in.  You have marble
quarries where the stone is more beautiful in colour than any the Greeks
ever had for their beautiful work, and yet day after day I am confronted
with the great building of some stupid man who has used the beautiful
material as if it were not precious almost beyond speech.  Marble should
not be used save by noble workmen.  There is nothing which gave me a
greater sense of barrenness in travelling through the country than the
entire absence of wood carving on your houses.  Wood carving is the
simplest of the decorative arts.  In Switzerland the little barefooted
boy beautifies the porch of his father’s house with examples of skill in
this direction.  Why should not American boys do a great deal more and
better than Swiss boys?

There is nothing to my mind more coarse in conception and more vulgar in
execution than modern jewellery.  This is something that can easily be
corrected.  Something better should be made out of the beautiful gold
which is stored up in your mountain hollows and strewn along your river
beds.  When I was at Leadville and reflected that all the shining silver
that I saw coming from the mines would be made into ugly dollars, it made
me sad.  It should be made into something more permanent.  The golden
gates at Florence are as beautiful to-day as when Michael Angelo saw
them.

We should see more of the workman than we do.  We should not be content
to have the salesman stand between us—the salesman who knows nothing of
what he is selling save that he is charging a great deal too much for it.
And watching the workman will teach that most important lesson—the
nobility of all rational workmanship.

I said in my last lecture that art would create a new brotherhood among
men by furnishing a universal language.  I said that under its beneficent
influences war might pass away.  Thinking this, what place can I ascribe
to art in our education?  If children grow up among all fair and lovely
things, they will grow to love beauty and detest ugliness before they
know the reason why.  If you go into a house where everything is coarse,
you find things chipped and broken and unsightly.  Nobody exercises any
care.  If everything is dainty and delicate, gentleness and refinement of
manner are unconsciously acquired.  When I was in San Francisco I used to
visit the Chinese Quarter frequently.  There I used to watch a great
hulking Chinese workman at his task of digging, and used to see him every
day drink his tea from a little cup as delicate in texture as the petal
of a flower, whereas in all the grand hotels of the land, where thousands
of dollars have been lavished on great gilt mirrors and gaudy columns, I
have been given my coffee or my chocolate in cups an inch and a quarter
thick.  I think I have deserved something nicer.

The art systems of the past have been devised by philosophers who looked
upon human beings as obstructions.  They have tried to educate boys’
minds before they had any.  How much better it would be in these early
years to teach children to use their hands in the rational service of
mankind.  I would have a workshop attached to every school, and one hour
a day given up to the teaching of simple decorative arts.  It would be a
golden hour to the children.  And you would soon raise up a race of
handicraftsmen who would transform the face of your country.  I have seen
only one such school in the United States, and this was in Philadelphia
and was founded by my friend Mr. Leyland.  I stopped there yesterday and
have brought some of the work here this afternoon to show you.  Here are
two disks of beaten brass: the designs on them are beautiful, the
workmanship is simple, and the entire result is satisfactory.  The work
was done by a little boy twelve years old.  This is a wooden bowl
decorated by a little girl of thirteen.  The design is lovely and the
colouring delicate and pretty.  Here you see a piece of beautiful wood
carving accomplished by a little boy of nine.  In such work as this,
children learn sincerity in art.  They learn to abhor the liar in art—the
man who paints wood to look like iron, or iron to look like stone.  It is
a practical school of morals.  No better way is there to learn to love
Nature than to understand Art.  It dignifies every flower of the field.
And, the boy who sees the thing of beauty which a bird on the wing
becomes when transferred to wood or canvas will probably not throw the
customary stone.  What we want is something spiritual added to life.
Nothing is so ignoble that Art cannot sanctify it.




ART AND THE HANDICRAFTSMAN


The fragments of which this lecture is composed are taken entirely from
the original manuscripts which have but recently been discovered.  It is
not certain that they all belong to the same lecture, nor that all were
written at the same period.  Some portions were written in Philadelphia
in 1882.

PEOPLE often talk as if there was an opposition between what is beautiful
and what is useful.  There is no opposition to beauty except ugliness:
all things are either beautiful or ugly, and utility will be always on
the side of the beautiful thing, because beautiful decoration is always
on the side of the beautiful thing, because beautiful decoration is
always an expression of the use you put a thing to and the value placed
on it.  No workman will beautifully decorate bad work, nor can you
possibly get good handicraftsmen or workmen without having beautiful
designs.  You should be quite sure of that.  If you have poor and
worthless designs in any craft or trade you will get poor and worthless
workmen only, but the minute you have noble and beautiful designs, then
you get men of power and intellect and feeling to work for you.  By
having good designs you have workmen who work not merely with their hands
but with their hearts and heads too; otherwise you will get merely the
fool or the loafer to work for you.

That the beauty of life is a thing of no moment, I suppose few people
would venture to assert.  And yet most civilised people act as if it were
of none, and in so doing are wronging both themselves and those that are
to come after them.  For that beauty which is meant by art is no mere
accident of human life which people can take or leave, but a positive
necessity of life if we are to live as nature meant us to, that is to say
unless we are content to be less than men.

Do not think that the commercial spirit which is the basis of your life
and cities here is opposed to art.  Who built the beautiful cities of the
world but commercial men and commercial men only?  Genoa built by its
traders, Florence by its bankers, and Venice, most lovely of all, by its
noble and honest merchants.

I do not wish you, remember, ‘to build a new Pisa,’ nor to bring ‘the
life or the decorations of the thirteenth century back again.’  ‘The
circumstances with which you must surround your workmen are those’ of
modern American life, ‘because the designs you have now to ask for from
your workmen are such as will make modern’ American ‘life beautiful.’
The art we want is the art based on all the inventions of modern
civilisation, and to suit all the needs of nineteenth-century life.

Do you think, for instance, that we object to machinery?  I tell you we
reverence it; we reverence it when it does its proper work, when it
relieves man from ignoble and soulless labour, not when it seeks to do
that which is valuable only when wrought by the hands and hearts of men.
Let us have no machine-made ornament at all; it is all bad and worthless
and ugly.  And let us not mistake the means of civilisation for the end
of civilisation; steam-engine, telephone and the like, are all wonderful,
but remember that their value depends entirely on the noble uses we make
of them, on the noble spirit in which we employ them, not on the things
themselves.

It is, no doubt, a great advantage to talk to a man at the Antipodes
through a telephone; its advantage depends entirely on the value of what
the two men have to say to one another.  If one merely shrieks slander
through a tube and the other whispers folly into a wire, do not think
that anybody is very much benefited by the invention.

The train that whirls an ordinary Englishman through Italy at the rate of
forty miles an hour and finally sends him home without any memory of that
lovely country but that he was cheated by a courier at Rome, or that he
got a bad dinner at Verona, does not do him or civilisation much good.
But that swift legion of fiery-footed engines that bore to the burning
ruins of Chicago the loving help and generous treasure of the world was
as noble and as beautiful as any golden troop of angels that ever fed the
hungry and clothed the naked in the antique times.  As beautiful, yes;
all machinery may be beautiful when it is undecorated even.  Do not seek
to decorate it.  We cannot but think all good machinery is graceful,
also, the line of strength and the line of beauty being one.

Give then, as I said, to your workmen of to-day the bright and noble
surroundings that you can yourself create.  Stately and simple
architecture for your cities, bright and simple dress for your men and
women; those are the conditions of a real artistic movement.  For the
artist is not concerned primarily with any theory of life but with life
itself, with the joy and loveliness that should come daily on eye and ear
for a beautiful external world.

But the simplicity must not be barrenness nor the bright colour gaudy.
For all beautiful colours are graduated colours, the colours that seem
about to pass into one another’s realm—colour without tone being like
music without harmony, mere discord.  Barren architecture, the vulgar and
glaring advertisements that desecrate not merely your cities but every
rock and river that I have seen yet in America—all this is not enough.  A
school of design we must have too in each city.  It should be a stately
and noble building, full of the best examples of the best art of the
world.  Furthermore, do not put your designers in a barren whitewashed
room and bid them work in that depressing and colourless atmosphere as I
have seen many of the American schools of design, but give them beautiful
surroundings.  Because you want to produce a permanent canon and standard
of taste in your workman, he must have always by him and before him
specimens of the best decorative art of the world, so that you can say to
him: ‘This is good work.  Greek or Italian or Japanese wrought it so many
years ago, but it is eternally young because eternally beautiful.’  Work
in this spirit and you will be sure to be right.  Do not copy it, but
work with the same love, the same reverence, the same freedom of
imagination.  You must teach him colour and design, how all beautiful
colours are graduated colours and glaring colours the essence of
vulgarity.  Show him the quality of any beautiful work of nature like the
rose, or any beautiful work of art like an Eastern carpet—being merely
the exquisite gradation of colour, one tone answering another like the
answering chords of a symphony.  Teach him how the true designer is not
he who makes the design and then colours it, but he who designs in
colour, creates in colour, thinks in colour too.  Show him how the most
gorgeous stained-glass windows of Europe are filled with white glass, and
the most gorgeous Eastern tapestry with toned colours—the primary colours
in both places being set in the white glass, and the tone colours like
brilliant jewels set in dusky gold.  And then as regards design, show him
how the real designer will take first any given limited space, little
disk of silver, it may be, like a Greek coin, or wide expanse of fretted
ceiling or lordly wall as Tintoret chose at Venice (it does not matter
which), and to this limited space—the first condition of decoration being
the limitation of the size of the material used—he will give the effect
of its being filled with beautiful decoration, filled with it as a golden
cup will be filled with wine, so complete that you should not be able to
take away anything from it or add anything to it.  For from a good piece
of design you can take away nothing, nor can you add anything to it, each
little bit of design being as absolutely necessary and as vitally
important to the whole effect as a note or chord of music is for a sonata
of Beethoven.

But I said the effect of its being so filled, because this, again, is of
the essence of good design.  With a simple spray of leaves and a bird in
flight a Japanese artist will give you the impression that he has
completely covered with lovely design the reed fan or lacquer cabinet at
which he is working, merely because he knows the exact spot in which to
place them.  All good design depends on the texture of the utensil used
and the use you wish to put it to.  One of the first things I saw in an
American school of design was a young lady painting a romantic moonlight
landscape on a large round dish, and another young lady covering a set of
dinner plates with a series of sunsets of the most remarkable colours.
Let your ladies paint moonlight landscapes and sunsets, but do not let
them paint them on dinner plates or dishes.  Let them take canvas or
paper for such work, but not clay or china.  They are merely painting the
wrong subjects on the wrong material, that is all.  They have not been
taught that every material and texture has certain qualities of its own.
The design suitable for one is quite wrong for the other, just as the
design which you should work on a flat table-cover ought to be quite
different from the design you would work on a curtain, for the one will
always be straight, the other broken into folds; and the use too one puts
the object to should guide one in the choice of design.  One does not
want to eat one’s terrapins off a romantic moonlight nor one’s clams off
a harrowing sunset.  Glory of sun and moon, let them be wrought for us by
our landscape artist and be on the walls of the rooms we sit in to remind
us of the undying beauty of the sunsets that fade and die, but do not let
us eat our soup off them and send them down to the kitchen twice a day to
be washed and scrubbed by the handmaid.

All these things are simple enough, yet nearly always forgotten.  Your
school of design here will teach your girls and your boys, your
handicraftsmen of the future (for all your schools of art should be local
schools, the schools of particular cities).  We talk of the Italian
school of painting, but there is no Italian school; there were the
schools of each city.  Every town in Italy, from Venice itself, queen of
the sea, to the little hill fortress of Perugia, each had its own school
of art, each different and all beautiful.

So do not mind what art Philadelphia or New York is having, but make by
the hands of your own citizens beautiful art for the joy of your own
citizens, for you have here the primary elements of a great artistic
movement.

For, believe me, the conditions of art are much simpler than people
imagine.  For the noblest art one requires a clear healthy atmosphere,
not polluted as the air of our English cities is by the smoke and grime
and horridness which comes from open furnace and from factory chimney.
You must have strong, sane, healthy physique among your men and women.
Sickly or idle or melancholy people do not do much in art.  And lastly,
you require a sense of individualism about each man and woman, for this
is the essence of art—a desire on the part of man to express himself in
the noblest way possible.  And this is the reason that the grandest art
of the world always came from a republic: Athens, Venice, and
Florence—there were no kings there and so their art was as noble and
simple as sincere.  But if you want to know what kind of art the folly of
kings will impose on a country look at the decorative art of France under
the _grand monarque_, under Louis the Fourteenth; the gaudy gilt
furniture writhing under a sense of its own horror and ugliness, with a
nymph smirking at every angle and a dragon mouthing on every claw.
Unreal and monstrous art this, and fit only for such periwigged
pomposities as the nobility of France at that time, but not at all fit
for you or me.  We do not want the rich to possess more beautiful things
but the poor to create more beautiful things; for ever man is poor who
cannot create.  Nor shall the art which you and I need be merely a purple
robe woven by a slave and thrown over the whitened body of some leprous
king to adorn or to conceal the sin of his luxury, but rather shall it be
the noble and beautiful expression of a people’s noble and beautiful
life.  Art shall be again the most glorious of all the chords through
which the spirit of a great nation finds its noblest utterance.

All around you, I said, lie the conditions for a great artistic movement
for every great art.  Let us think of one of them; a sculptor, for
instance.

If a modern sculptor were to come and say, ‘Very well, but where can one
find subjects for sculpture out of men who wear frock-coats and
chimney-pot hats?’ I would tell him to go to the docks of a great city
and watch the men loading or unloading the stately ships, working at
wheel or windlass, hauling at rope or gangway.  I have never watched a
man do anything useful who has not been graceful at some moment of his
labour: it is only the loafer and the idle saunterer who is as useless
and uninteresting to the artist as he is to himself.  I would ask the
sculptor to go with me to any of your schools or universities, to the
running ground and gymnasium, to watch the young men start for a race,
hurling quoit or club, kneeling to tie their shoes before leaping,
stepping from the boat or bending to the oar, and to carve them; and when
he was weary of cities I would ask him to come to your fields and meadows
to watch the reaper with his sickle and the cattle-driver with lifted
lasso.  For if a man cannot find the noblest motives for his art in such
simple daily things as a woman drawing water from the well or a man
leaning with his scythe, he will not find them anywhere at all.  Gods and
goddesses the Greek carved because he loved them; saint and king the Goth
because he believed in them.  But you, you do not care much for Greek
gods and goddesses, and you are perfectly and entirely right; and you do
not think much of kings either, and you are quite right.  But what you do
love are your own men and women, your own flowers and fields, your own
hills and mountains, and these are what your art should represent to you.

Ours has been the first movement which has brought the handicraftsman and
the artist together, for remember that by separating the one from the
other you do ruin to both; you rob the one of all spiritual motive and
all imaginative joy, you isolate the other from all real technical
perfection.  The two greatest schools of art in the world, the sculptor
at Athens and the school of painting at Venice, had their origin entirely
in a long succession of simple and earnest handicraftsmen.  It was the
Greek potter who taught the sculptor that restraining influence of design
which was the glory of the Parthenon; it was the Italian decorator of
chests and household goods who kept Venetian painting always true to its
primary pictorial condition of noble colour.  For we should remember that
all the arts are fine arts and all the arts decorative arts.  The
greatest triumph of Italian painting was the decoration of a pope’s
chapel in Rome and the wall of a room in Venice.  Michael Angelo wrought
the one, and Tintoret, the dyer’s son, the other.  And the little ‘Dutch
landscape, which you put over your sideboard to-day, and between the
windows to-morrow, is’ no less a glorious ‘piece of work than the extents
of field and forest with which Benozzo has made green and beautiful the
once melancholy arcade of the Campo Santo at Pisa,’ as Ruskin says.

Do not imitate the works of a nation, Greek or Japanese, Italian or
English; but their artistic spirit of design and their artistic attitude
to-day, their own world, you should absorb but imitate never, copy never.
Unless you can make as beautiful a design in painted china or embroidered
screen or beaten brass out of your American turkey as the Japanese does
out of his grey silver-winged stork, you will never do anything.  Let the
Greek carve his lions and the Goth his dragons: buffalo and wild deer are
the animals for you.

Golden rod and aster and rose and all the flowers that cover your valleys
in the spring and your hills in the autumn: let them be the flowers for
your art.  Not merely has Nature given you the noblest motives for a new
school of decoration, but to you above all other countries has she given
the utensils to work in.

You have quarries of marble richer than Pentelicus, more varied than
Paros, but do not build a great white square house of marble and think
that it is beautiful, or that you are using marble nobly.  If you build
in marble you must either carve it into joyous decoration, like the lives
of dancing children that adorn the marble castles of the Loire, or fill
it with beautiful sculpture, frieze and pediment, as the Greeks did, or
inlay it with other coloured marbles as they did in Venice.  Otherwise
you had better build in simple red brick as your Puritan fathers, with no
pretence and with some beauty.  Do not treat your marble as if it was
ordinary stone and build a house of mere blocks of it.  For it is indeed
a precious stone, this marble of yours, and only workmen of nobility of
invention and delicacy of hand should be allowed to touch it at all,
carving it into noble statues or into beautiful decoration, or inlaying
it with other coloured marbles: for ‘the true colours of architecture are
those of natural stone, and I would fain see them taken advantage of to
the full.  Every variety is here, from pale yellow to purple passing
through orange, red, and brown, entirely at your command; nearly every
kind of green and grey also is attainable, and with these and with pure
white what harmony might you not achieve.  Of stained and variegated
stone the quantity is unlimited, the kinds innumerable.  Were brighter
colours required, let glass, and gold protected by glass, be used in
mosaic, a kind of work as durable as the solid stone and incapable of
losing its lustre by time.  And let the painter’s work be reserved for
the shadowed loggia and inner chamber.

‘This is the true and faithful way of building.  Where this cannot be,
the device of external colouring may indeed be employed without
dishonour—but it must be with the warning reflection that a time will
come when such aids will pass away and when the building will be judged
in its lifelessness, dying the death of the dolphin.  Better the less
bright, more enduring fabric.  The transparent alabasters of San Miniato
and the mosaics of Saint Mark’s are more warmly filled and more brightly
touched by every return of morning and evening, while the hues of the
Gothic cathedrals have died like the iris out of the cloud, and the
temples, whose azure and purple once flamed above the Grecian promontory,
stand in their faded whiteness like snows which the sunset has left
cold.’—Ruskin, _Seven Lamps of Architecture_, II.

I do not know anything so perfectly commonplace in design as most modern
jewellery.  How easy for you to change that and to produce goldsmiths’
work that would be a joy to all of us.  The gold is ready for you in
unexhausted treasure, stored up in the mountain hollow or strewn on the
river sand, and was not given to you merely for barren speculation.
There should be some better record of it left in your history than the
merchant’s panic and the ruined home.  We do not remember often enough
how constantly the history of a great nation will live in and by its art.
Only a few thin wreaths of beaten gold remain to tell us of the stately
empire of Etruria; and, while from the streets of Florence the noble
knight and haughty duke have long since passed away, the gates which the
simple goldsmith Ghiberti made for their pleasure still guard their
lovely house of baptism, worthy still of the praise of Michael Angelo who
called them worthy to be the Gates of Paradise.

Have then your school of design, search out your workmen and, when you
find one who has delicacy of hand and that wonder of invention necessary
for goldsmiths’ work, do not leave him to toil in obscurity and dishonour
and have a great glaring shop and two great glaring shop-boys in it (not
to take your orders: they never do that; but to force you to buy
something you do not want at all).  When you want a thing wrought in
gold, goblet or shield for the feast, necklace or wreath for the women,
tell him what you like most in decoration, flower or wreath, bird in
flight or hound in the chase, image of the woman you love or the friend
you honour.  Watch him as he beats out the gold into those thin plates
delicate as the petals of a yellow rose, or draws it into the long wires
like tangled sunbeams at dawn.  Whoever that workman be, help him,
cherish him, and you will have such lovely work from his hand as will be
a joy to you for all time.

This is the spirit of our movement in England, and this is the spirit in
which we would wish you to work, making eternal by your art all that is
noble in your men and women, stately in your lakes and mountains,
beautiful in your own flowers and natural life.  We want to see that you
have nothing in your houses that has not been a joy to the man who made
it, and is not a joy to those that use it.  We want to see you create an
art made by the hands of the people to please the hearts of the people
too.  Do you like this spirit or not?  Do you think it simple and strong,
noble in its aim, and beautiful in its result?  I know you do.

Folly and slander have their own way for a little time, but for a little
time only.  You now know what we mean: you will be able to estimate what
is said of us—its value and its motive.

There should be a law that no ordinary newspaper should be allowed to
write about art.  The harm they do by their foolish and random writing it
would be impossible to overestimate—not to the artist but to the public,
blinding them to all, but harming the artist not at all.  Without them we
would judge a man simply by his work; but at present the newspapers are
trying hard to induce the public to judge a sculptor, for instance, never
by his statues but by the way he treats his wife; a painter by the amount
of his income and a poet by the colour of his neck-tie.  I said there
should be a law, but there is really no necessity for a new law: nothing
could be easier than to bring the ordinary critic under the head of the
criminal classes.  But let us leave such an inartistic subject and return
to beautiful and comely things, remembering that the art which would
represent the spirit of modern newspapers would be exactly the art which
you and I want to avoid—grotesque art, malice mocking you from every
gateway, slander sneering at you from every corner.

Perhaps you may be surprised at my talking of labour and the workman.
You have heard of me, I fear, through the medium of your somewhat
imaginative newspapers as, if not a ‘Japanese young man,’ at least a
young man to whom the rush and clamour and reality of the modern world
were distasteful, and whose greatest difficulty in life was the
difficulty of living up to the level of his blue china—a paradox from
which England has not yet recovered.

Well, let me tell you how it first came to me at all to create an
artistic movement in England, a movement to show the rich what beautiful
things they might enjoy and the poor what beautiful things they might
create.

One summer afternoon in Oxford—‘that sweet city with her dreaming
spires,’ lovely as Venice in its splendour, noble in its learning as
Rome, down the long High Street that winds from tower to tower, past
silent cloister and stately gateway, till it reaches that long, grey
seven-arched bridge which Saint Mary used to guard (used to, I say,
because they are now pulling it down to build a tramway and a light
cast-iron bridge in its place, desecrating the loveliest city in
England)—well, we were coming down the street—a troop of young men, some
of them like myself only nineteen, going to river or tennis-court or
cricket-field—when Ruskin going up to lecture in cap and gown met us.  He
seemed troubled and prayed us to go back with him to his lecture, which a
few of us did, and there he spoke to us not on art this time but on life,
saying that it seemed to him to be wrong that all the best physique and
strength of the young men in England should be spent aimlessly on cricket
ground or river, without any result at all except that if one rowed well
one got a pewter-pot, and if one made a good score, a cane-handled bat.
He thought, he said, that we should be working at something that would do
good to other people, at something by which we might show that in all
labour there was something noble.  Well, we were a good deal moved, and
said we would do anything he wished.  So he went out round Oxford and
found two villages, Upper and Lower Hinksey, and between them there lay a
great swamp, so that the villagers could not pass from one to the other
without many miles of a round.  And when we came back in winter he asked
us to help him to make a road across this morass for these village people
to use.  So out we went, day after day, and learned how to lay levels and
to break stones, and to wheel barrows along a plank—a very difficult
thing to do.  And Ruskin worked with us in the mist and rain and mud of
an Oxford winter, and our friends and our enemies came out and mocked us
from the bank.  We did not mind it much then, and we did not mind it
afterwards at all, but worked away for two months at our road.  And what
became of the road?  Well, like a bad lecture it ended abruptly—in the
middle of the swamp.  Ruskin going away to Venice, when we came back for
the next term there was no leader, and the ‘diggers,’ as they called us,
fell asunder.  And I felt that if there was enough spirit amongst the
young men to go out to such work as road-making for the sake of a noble
ideal of life, I could from them create an artistic movement that might
change, as it has changed, the face of England.  So I sought them
out—leader they would call me—but there was no leader: we were all
searchers only and we were bound to each other by noble friendship and by
noble art.  There was none of us idle: poets most of us, so ambitious
were we: painters some of us, or workers in metal or modellers,
determined that we would try and create for ourselves beautiful work: for
the handicraftsman beautiful work, for those who love us poems and
pictures, for those who love us not epigrams and paradoxes and scorn.

Well, we have done something in England and we will do something more.
Now, I do not want you, believe me, to ask your brilliant young men, your
beautiful young girls, to go out and make a road on a swamp for any
village in America, but I think you might each of you have some art to
practise.

                                * * * * *

We must have, as Emerson said, a mechanical craft for our culture, a
basis for our higher accomplishments in the work of our hands—the
uselessness of most people’s hands seems to me one of the most
unpractical things.  ‘No separation from labour can be without some loss
of power or truth to the seer,’ says Emerson again.  The heroism which
would make on us the impression of Epaminondas must be that of a domestic
conqueror.  The hero of the future is he who shall bravely and gracefully
subdue this Gorgon of fashion and of convention.

When you have chosen your own part, abide by it, and do not weakly try
and reconcile yourself with the world.  The heroic cannot be the common
nor the common the heroic.  Congratulate yourself if you have done
something strange and extravagant and broken the monotony of a decorous
age.

And lastly, let us remember that art is the one thing which Death cannot
harm.  The little house at Concord may be desolate, but the wisdom of New
England’s Plato is not silenced nor the brilliancy of that Attic genius
dimmed: the lips of Longfellow are still musical for us though his dust
be turning into the flowers which he loved: and as it is with the greater
artists, poet and philosopher and song-bird, so let it be with you.




LECTURE TO ART STUDENTS


Delivered to the Art students of the Royal Academy at their Club in
Golden Square, Westminster, on June 30, 1883.  The text is taken from the
original manuscript.

IN the lecture which it is my privilege to deliver before you to-night I
do not desire to give you any abstract definition of beauty at all.  For
we who are working in art cannot accept any theory of beauty in exchange
for beauty itself, and, so far from desiring to isolate it in a formula
appealing to the intellect, we, on the contrary, seek to materialise it
in a form that gives joy to the soul through the senses.  We want to
create it, not to define it.  The definition should follow the work: the
work should not adapt itself to the definition.

Nothing, indeed, is more dangerous to the young artist than any
conception of ideal beauty: he is constantly led by it either into weak
prettiness or lifeless abstraction: whereas to touch the ideal at all you
must not strip it of vitality.  You must find it in life and re-create it
in art.

While, then, on the one hand I do not desire to give you any philosophy
of beauty—for, what I want to-night is to investigate how we can create
art, not how we can talk of it—on the other hand, I do not wish to deal
with anything like a history of English art.

To begin with, such an expression as English art is a meaningless
expression.  One might just as well talk of English mathematics.  Art is
the science of beauty, and Mathematics the science of truth: there is no
national school of either.  Indeed, a national school is a provincial
school, merely.  Nor is there any such thing as a school of art even.
There are merely artists, that is all.

And as regards histories of art, they are quite valueless to you unless
you are seeking the ostentatious oblivion of an art professorship.  It is
of no use to you to know the date of Perugino or the birthplace of
Salvator Rosa: all that you should learn about art is to know a good
picture when you see it, and a bad picture when you see it.  As regards
the date of the artist, all good work looks perfectly modern: a piece of
Greek sculpture, a portrait of Velasquez—they are always modern, always
of our time.  And as regards the nationality of the artist, art is not
national but universal.  As regards archæology, then, avoid it
altogether: archæology is merely the science of making excuses for bad
art; it is the rock on which many a young artist founders and shipwrecks;
it is the abyss from which no artist, old or young, ever returns.  Or, if
he does return, he is so covered with the dust of ages and the mildew of
time, that he is quite unrecognisable as an artist, and has to conceal
himself for the rest of his days under the cap of a professor, or as a
mere illustrator of ancient history.  How worthless archæology is in art
you can estimate by the fact of its being so popular.  Popularity is the
crown of laurel which the world puts on bad art.  Whatever is popular is
wrong.

As I am not going to talk to you, then, about the philosophy of the
beautiful, or the history of art, you will ask me what I am going to talk
about.  The subject of my lecture to-night is what makes an artist and
what does the artist make; what are the relations of the artist to his
surroundings, what is the education the artist should get, and what is
the quality of a good work of art.

Now, as regards the relations of the artist to his surroundings, by which
I mean the age and country in which he is born.  All good art, as I said
before, has nothing to do with any particular century; but this
universality is the quality of the work of art; the conditions that
produce that quality are different.  And what, I think, you should do is
to realise completely your age in order completely to abstract yourself
from it; remembering that if you are an artist at all, you will be not
the mouthpiece of a century, but the master of eternity, that all art
rests on a principle, and that mere temporal considerations are no
principle at all; and that those who advise you to make your art
representative of the nineteenth century are advising you to produce an
art which your children, when you have them, will think old-fashioned.
But you will tell me this is an inartistic age, and we are an inartistic
people, and the artist suffers much in this nineteenth century of ours.

Of course he does.  I, of all men, am not going to deny that.  But
remember that there never has been an artistic age, or an artistic
people, since the beginning of the world.  The artist has always been,
and will always be, an exquisite exception.  There is no golden age of
art; only artists who have produced what is more golden than gold.

_What_, you will say to me, the Greeks? were not they an artistic people?

Well, the Greeks certainly not, but, perhaps, you mean the Athenians, the
citizens of one out of a thousand cities.

Do you think that they were an artistic people?  Take them even at the
time of their highest artistic development, the latter part of the fifth
century before Christ, when they had the greatest poets and the greatest
artists of the antique world, when the Parthenon rose in loveliness at
the bidding of a Phidias, and the philosopher spake of wisdom in the
shadow of the painted portico, and tragedy swept in the perfection of
pageant and pathos across the marble of the stage.  Were they an artistic
people then?  Not a bit of it.  What is an artistic people but a people
who love their artists and understand their art?  The Athenians could do
neither.

How did they treat Phidias?  To Phidias we owe the great era, not merely
in Greek, but in all art—I mean of the introduction of the use of the
living model.

And what would you say if all the English bishops, backed by the English
people, came down from Exeter Hall to the Royal Academy one day and took
off Sir Frederick Leighton in a prison van to Newgate on the charge of
having allowed you to make use of the living model in your designs for
sacred pictures?

Would you not cry out against the barbarism and the Puritanism of such an
idea?  Would you not explain to them that the worst way to honour God is
to dishonour man who is made in His image, and is the work of His hands;
and, that if one wants to paint Christ one must take the most Christlike
person one can find, and if one wants to paint the Madonna, the purest
girl one knows?

Would you not rush off and burn down Newgate, if necessary, and say that
such a thing was without parallel in history?

Without parallel?  Well, that is exactly what the Athenians did.

In the room of the Parthenon marbles, in the British Museum, you will see
a marble shield on the wall.  On it there are two figures; one of a man
whose face is half hidden, the other of a man with the godlike lineaments
of Pericles.  For having done this, for having introduced into a bas
relief, taken from Greek sacred history, the image of the great statesman
who was ruling Athens at the time, Phidias was flung into prison and
there, in the common gaol of Athens, died, the supreme artist of the old
world.

And do you think that this was an exceptional case?  The sign of a
Philistine age is the cry of immorality against art, and this cry was
raised by the Athenian people against every great poet and thinker of
their day—Æschylus, Euripides, Socrates.  It was the same with Florence
in the thirteenth century.  Good handicrafts are due to guilds, not to
the people.  The moment the guilds lost their power and the people rushed
in, beauty and honesty of work died.

And so, never talk of an artistic people; there never has been such a
thing.

But, perhaps, you will tell me that the external beauty of the world has
almost entirely passed away from us, that the artist dwells no longer in
the midst of the lovely surroundings which, in ages past, were the
natural inheritance of every one, and that art is very difficult in this
unlovely town of ours, where, as you go to your work in the morning, or
return from it at eventide, you have to pass through street after street
of the most foolish and stupid architecture that the world has ever seen;
architecture, where every lovely Greek form is desecrated and defiled,
and every lovely Gothic form defiled and desecrated, reducing
three-fourths of the London houses to being, merely, like square boxes of
the vilest proportions, as gaunt as they are grimy, and as poor as they
are pretentious—the hall door always of the wrong colour, and the windows
of the wrong size, and where, even when wearied of the houses you turn to
contemplate the street itself, you have nothing to look at but
chimney-pot hats, men with sandwich boards, vermilion letter-boxes, and
do that even at the risk of being run over by an emerald-green omnibus.

Is not art difficult, you will say to me, in such surroundings as these?
Of course it is difficult, but then art was never easy; you yourselves
would not wish it to be easy; and, besides, nothing is worth doing except
what the world says is impossible.

Still, you do not care to be answered merely by a paradox.  What are the
relations of the artist to the external world, and what is the result of
the loss of beautiful surroundings to you, is one of the most important
questions of modern art; and there is no point on which Mr. Ruskin so
insists as that the decadence of art has come from the decadence of
beautiful things; and that when the artist cannot feed his eye on beauty,
beauty goes from his work.

I remember in one of his lectures, after describing the sordid aspect of
a great English city, he draws for us a picture of what were the artistic
surroundings long ago.

Think, he says, in words of perfect and picturesque imagery, whose beauty
I can but feebly echo, think of what was the scene which presented
itself, in his afternoon walk, to a designer of the Gothic school of
Pisa—Nino Pisano or any of his men: {206}

    On each side of a bright river he saw rise a line of brighter
    palaces, arched and pillared, and inlaid with deep red porphyry, and
    with serpentine; along the quays before their gates were riding
    troops of knights, noble in face and form, dazzling in crest and
    shield; horse and man one labyrinth of quaint colour and gleaming
    light—the purple, and silver, and scarlet fringes flowing over the
    strong limbs and clashing mall, like sea-waves over rocks at sunset.
    Opening on each side from the river were gardens, courts, and
    cloisters; long successions of white pillars among wreaths of vine;
    leaping of fountains through buds of pomegranate and orange: and
    still along the garden-paths, and under and through the crimson of
    the pomegranate shadows, moving slowly, groups of the fairest women
    that Italy ever saw—fairest, because purest and thoughtfullest;
    trained in all high knowledge, as in all courteous art—in dance, in
    song, in sweet wit, in lofty learning, in loftier courage, in
    loftiest love—able alike to cheer, to enchant, or save, the souls of
    men.  Above all this scenery of perfect human life, rose dome and
    bell-tower, burning with white alabaster and gold: beyond dome and
    bell-tower the slopes of mighty hills hoary with olive; far in the
    north, above a purple sea of peaks of solemn Apennine, the clear,
    sharp-cloven Carrara mountains sent up their steadfast flames of
    marble summit into amber sky; the great sea itself, scorching with
    expanse of light, stretching from their feet to the Gorgonian isles;
    and over all these, ever present, near or far—seen through the leaves
    of vine, or imaged with all its march of clouds in the Arno’s stream,
    or set with its depth of blue close against the golden hair and
    burning cheek of lady and knight,—that untroubled and sacred sky,
    which was to all men, in those days of innocent faith, indeed the
    unquestioned abode of spirits, as the earth was of men; and which
    opened straight through its gates of cloud and veils of dew into the
    awfulness of the eternal world;—a heaven in which every cloud that
    passed was literally the chariot of an angel, and every ray of its
    Evening and Morning streamed from the throne of God.

    What think you of that for a school of design?

And then look at the depressing, monotonous appearance of any modern
city, the sombre dress of men and women, the meaningless and barren
architecture, the colourless and dreadful surroundings.  Without a
beautiful national life, not sculpture merely, but all the arts will die.

Well, as regards the religious feeling of the close of the passage, I do
not think I need speak about that.  Religion springs from religious
feeling, art from artistic feeling: you never get one from the other;
unless you have the right root you will not get the right flower; and, if
a man sees in a cloud the chariot of an angel, he will probably paint it
very unlike a cloud.

But, as regards the general idea of the early part of that lovely bit of
prose, is it really true that beautiful surroundings are necessary for
the artist?  I think not; I am sure not.  Indeed, to me the most
inartistic thing in this age of ours is not the indifference of the
public to beautiful things, but the indifference of the artist to the
things that are called ugly.  For, to the real artist, nothing is
beautiful or ugly in itself at all.  With the facts of the object he has
nothing to do, but with its appearance only, and appearance is a matter
of light and shade, of masses, of position, and of value.

Appearance is, in fact, a matter of effect merely, and it is with the
effects of nature that you have to deal, not with the real condition of
the object.  What you, as painters, have to paint is not things as they
are but things as they seem to be, not things as they are but things as
they are not.

No object is so ugly that, under certain conditions of light and shade,
or proximity to other things, it will not look beautiful; no object is so
beautiful that, under certain conditions, it will not look ugly.  I
believe that in every twenty-four hours what is beautiful looks ugly, and
what is ugly looks beautiful, once.

And, the commonplace character of so much of our English painting seems
to me due to the fact that so many of our young artists look merely at
what we may call ‘ready-made beauty,’ whereas you exist as artists not to
copy beauty but to create it in your art, to wait and watch for it in
nature.

What would you say of a dramatist who would take nobody but virtuous
people as characters in his play?  Would you not say he was missing half
of life?  Well, of the young artist who paints nothing but beautiful
things, I say he misses one half of the world.

Do not wait for life to be picturesque, but try and see life under
picturesque conditions.  These conditions you can create for yourself in
your studio, for they are merely conditions of light.  In nature, you
must wait for them, watch for them, choose them; and, if you wait and
watch, come they will.

In Gower Street at night you may see a letter-box that is picturesque: on
the Thames Embankment you may see picturesque policemen.  Even Venice is
not always beautiful, nor France.

To paint what you see is a good rule in art, but to see what is worth
painting is better.  See life under pictorial conditions.  It is better
to live in a city of changeable weather than in a city of lovely
surroundings.

Now, having seen what makes the artist, and what the artist makes, who is
the artist?  There is a man living amongst us who unites in himself all
the qualities of the noblest art, whose work is a joy for all time, who
is, himself, a master of all time.  That man is Mr. Whistler.

                                * * * * *

But, you will say, modern dress, that is bad.  If you cannot paint black
cloth you could not have painted silken doublet.  Ugly dress is better
for art—facts of vision, not of the object.

What is a picture?  Primarily, a picture is a beautifully coloured
surface, merely, with no more spiritual message or meaning for you than
an exquisite fragment of Venetian glass or a blue tile from the wall of
Damascus.  It is, primarily, a purely decorative thing, a delight to look
at.

All archæological pictures that make you say ‘How curious!’ all
sentimental pictures that make you say, ‘How sad!’ all historical
pictures that make you say ‘How interesting!’ all pictures that do not
immediately give you such artistic joy as to make you say ‘How
beautiful!’ are bad pictures.

                                * * * * *

We never know what an artist is going to do.  Of course not.  The artist
is not a specialist.  All such divisions as animal painters, landscape
painters, painters of Scotch cattle in an English mist, painters of
English cattle in a Scotch mist, racehorse painters, bull-terrier
painters, all are shallow.  If a man is an artist he can paint
everything.

The object of art is to stir the most divine and remote of the chords
which make music in our soul; and colour is indeed, of itself a mystical
presence on things, and tone a kind of sentinel.

Am I pleading, then, for mere technique?  No.  As long as there are any
signs of technique at all, the picture is unfinished.  What is finish?  A
picture is finished when all traces of work, and of the means employed to
bring about the result, have disappeared.

In the case of handicraftsmen—the weaver, the potter, the smith—on their
work are the traces of their hand.  But it is not so with the painter; it
is not so with the artist.

Art should have no sentiment about it but its beauty, no technique except
what you cannot observe.  One should be able to say of a picture not that
it is ‘well painted,’ but that it is ‘not painted.’

What is the difference between absolutely decorative art and a painting?
Decorative art emphasises its material: imaginative art annihilates it.
Tapestry shows its threads as part of its beauty: a picture annihilates
its canvas: it shows nothing of it.  Porcelain emphasises its glaze:
water-colours reject the paper.

A picture has no meaning but its beauty, no message but its joy.  That is
the first truth about art that you must never lose sight of.  A picture
is a purely decorative thing.




LONDON MODELS


_English Illustrated Magazine_, January 1889.

PROFESSIONAL models are a purely modern invention.  To the Greeks, for
instance, they were quite unknown.  Mr. Mahaffy, it is true, tells us
that Pericles used to present peacocks to the great ladies of Athenian
society in order to induce them to sit to his friend Phidias, and we know
that Polygnotus introduced into his picture of the Trojan women the face
of Elpinice, the celebrated sister of the great Conservative leader of
the day, but these _grandes dames_ clearly do not come under our
category.  As for the old masters, they undoubtedly made constant studies
from their pupils and apprentices, and even their religious pictures are
full of the portraits of their friends and relations, but they do not
seem to have had the inestimable advantage of the existence of a class of
people whose sole profession is to pose.  In fact the model, in our sense
of the word, is the direct creation of Academic Schools.

Every country now has its own models, except America.  In New York, and
even in Boston, a good model is so great a rarity that most of the
artists are reduced to painting Niagara and millionaires.  In Europe,
however, it is different.  Here we have plenty of models, and of every
nationality.  The Italian models are the best.  The natural grace of
their attitudes, as well as the wonderful picturesqueness of their
colouring, makes them facile—often too facile—subjects for the painter’s
brush.  The French models, though not so beautiful as the Italian,
possess a quickness of intellectual sympathy, a capacity, in fact, of
understanding the artist, which is quite remarkable.  They have also a
great command over the varieties of facial expression, are peculiarly
dramatic, and can chatter the _argot_ of the _atelier_ as cleverly as the
critic of the _Gil Blas_.  The English models form a class entirely by
themselves.  They are not so picturesque as the Italian, nor so clever as
the French, and they have absolutely no tradition, so to speak, of their
order.  Now and then some old veteran knocks at the studio door, and
proposes to sit as Ajax defying the lightning, or as King Lear upon the
blasted heath.  One of them some time ago called on a popular painter
who, happening at the moment to require his services, engaged him, and
told him to begin by kneeling down in the attitude of prayer.  ‘Shall I
be Biblical or Shakespearean, sir?’ asked the veteran.
‘Well—Shakespearean,’ answered the artist, wondering by what subtle
_nuance_ of expression the model would convey the difference.  ‘All
right, sir,’ said the professor of posing, and he solemnly knelt down and
began to wink with his left eye!  This class, however, is dying out.  As
a rule the model, nowadays, is a pretty girl, from about twelve to
twenty-five years of age, who knows nothing about art, cares less, and is
merely anxious to earn seven or eight shillings a day without much
trouble.  English models rarely look at a picture, and never venture on
any æsthetic theories.  In fact, they realise very completely Mr.
Whistler’s idea of the function of an art critic, for they pass no
criticisms at all.  They accept all schools of art with the grand
catholicity of the auctioneer, and sit to a fantastic young impressionist
as readily as to a learned and laborious academician.  They are neither
for the Whistlerites nor against them; the quarrel between the school of
facts and the school of effects touches them not; idealistic and
naturalistic are words that convey no meaning to their ears; they merely
desire that the studio shall be warm, and the lunch hot, for all charming
artists give their models lunch.

As to what they are asked to do they are equally indifferent.  On Monday
they will don the rags of a beggar-girl for Mr. Pumper, whose pathetic
pictures of modern life draw such tears from the public, and on Tuesday
they will pose in a peplum for Mr. Phoebus, who thinks that all really
artistic subjects are necessarily B.C.  They career gaily through all
centuries and through all costumes, and, like actors, are interesting
only when they are not themselves.  They are extremely good-natured, and
very accommodating.  ‘What do you sit for?’ said a young artist to a
model who had sent him in her card (all models, by the way, have cards
and a small black bag).  ‘Oh, for anything you like, sir,’ said the girl,
‘landscape if necessary!’

Intellectually, it must be acknowledged, they are Philistines, but
physically they are perfect—at least some are.  Though none of them can
talk Greek, many can look Greek, which to a nineteenth-century painter is
naturally of great importance.  If they are allowed, they chatter a great
deal, but they never say anything.  Their observations are the only
_banalités_ heard in Bohemia.  However, though they cannot appreciate the
artist as artist, they are quite ready to appreciate the artist as a man.
They are very sensitive to kindness, respect and generosity.  A beautiful
model who had sat for two years to one of our most distinguished English
painters, got engaged to a street vendor of penny ices.

On her marriage the painter sent her a pretty wedding present, and
received in return a nice letter of thanks with the following remarkable
postscript: ‘Never eat the green ices!’

When they are tired a wise artist gives them a rest.  Then they sit in a
chair and read penny dreadfuls, till they are roused from the tragedy of
literature to take their place again in the tragedy of art.  A few of
them smoke cigarettes.  This, however, is regarded by the other models as
showing a want of seriousness, and is not generally approved of.  They
are engaged by the day and by the half-day.  The tariff is a shilling an
hour, to which great artists usually add an omnibus fare.  The two best
things about them are their extraordinary prettiness, and their extreme
respectability.  As a class they are very well behaved, particularly
those who sit for the figure, a fact which is curious or natural
according to the view one takes of human nature.  They usually marry
well, and sometimes they marry the artist.  For an artist to marry his
model is as fatal as for a _gourmet_ to marry his cook: the one gets no
sittings, and the other gets no dinners.

On the whole the English female models are very naïve, very natural, and
very good-humoured.  The virtues which the artist values most in them are
prettiness and punctuality.  Every sensible model consequently keeps a
diary of her engagements, and dresses neatly.  The bad season is, of
course, the summer, when the artists are out of town.  However, of late
years some artists have engaged their models to follow them, and the wife
of one of our most charming painters has often had three or four models
under her charge in the country, so that the work of her husband and his
friends should not be interrupted.  In France the models migrate _en
masse_ to the little seaport villages or forest hamlets where the
painters congregate.  The English models, however, wait patiently in
London, as a rule, till the artists come back.  Nearly all of them live
with their parents, and help to support the house.  They have every
qualification for being immortalised in art except that of beautiful
hands.  The hands of the English model are nearly always coarse and red.

As for the male models, there is the veteran whom we have mentioned
above.  He has all the traditions of the grand style, and is rapidly
disappearing with the school he represents.  An old man who talks about
Fuseli is, of course, unendurable, and, besides, patriarchs have ceased
to be fashionable subjects.  Then there is the true Academy model.  He is
usually a man of thirty, rarely good-looking, but a perfect miracle of
muscles.  In fact he is the apotheosis of anatomy, and is so conscious of
his own splendour that he tells you of his tibia and his thorax, as if no
one else had anything of the kind.  Then come the Oriental models.  The
supply of these is limited, but there are always about a dozen in London.
They are very much sought after as they can remain immobile for hours,
and generally possess lovely costumes.  However, they have a very poor
opinion of English art, which they regard as something between a vulgar
personality and a commonplace photograph.  Next we have the Italian youth
who has come over specially to be a model, or takes to it when his organ
is out of repair.  He is often quite charming with his large melancholy
eyes, his crisp hair, and his slim brown figure.  It is true he eats
garlic, but then he can stand like a faun and couch like a leopard, so he
is forgiven.  He is always full of pretty compliments, and has been known
to have kind words of encouragement for even our greatest artists.  As
for the English lad of the same age, he never sits at all.  Apparently he
does not regard the career of a model as a serious profession.  In any
case he is rarely, if ever, to be got hold of.  English boys, too, are
difficult to find.  Sometimes an ex-model who has a son will curl his
hair, and wash his face, and bring him the round of the studios, all soap
and shininess.  The young school don’t like him, but the older school do,
and when he appears on the walls of the Royal Academy he is called _The
Infant Samuel_.  Occasionally also an artist catches a couple of _gamins_
in the gutter and asks them to come to his studio.  The first time they
always appear, but after that they don’t keep their appointments.  They
dislike sitting still, and have a strong and perhaps natural objection to
looking pathetic.  Besides, they are always under the impression that the
artist is laughing at them.  It is a sad fact, but there is no doubt that
the poor are completely unconscious of their own picturesqueness.  Those
of them who can be induced to sit do so with the idea that the artist is
merely a benevolent philanthropist who has chosen an eccentric method of
distributing alms to the undeserving.  Perhaps the School Board will
teach the London _gamin_ his own artistic value, and then they will be
better models than they are now.  One remarkable privilege belongs to the
Academy model, that of extorting a sovereign from any newly elected
Associate or R.A.  They wait at Burlington House till the announcement is
made, and then race to the hapless artist’s house.  The one who arrives
first receives the money.  They have of late been much troubled at the
long distances they have had to run, and they look with disfavour on the
election of artists who live at Hampstead or at Bedford Park, for it is
considered a point of honour not to employ the underground railway,
omnibuses, or any artificial means of locomotion.  The race is to the
swift.

Besides the professional posers of the studio there are posers of the
Row, the posers at afternoon teas, the posers in politics and the circus
posers.  All four classes are delightful, but only the last class is ever
really decorative.  Acrobats and gymnasts can give the young painter
infinite suggestions, for they bring into their art an element of
swiftness of motion and of constant change that the studio model
necessarily lacks.  What is interesting in these ‘slaves of the ring’ is
that with them Beauty is an unconscious result not a conscious aim, the
result in fact of the mathematical calculation of curves and distances,
of absolute precision of eye, of the scientific knowledge of the
equilibrium of forces, and of perfect physical training.  A good acrobat
is always graceful, though grace is never his object; he is graceful
because he does what he has to do in the best way in which it can be
done—graceful because he is natural.  If an ancient Greek were to come to
life now, which considering the probable severity of his criticisms would
be rather trying to our conceit, he would be found far oftener at the
circus than at the theatre.  A good circus is an oasis of Hellenism in a
world that reads too much to be wise, and thinks too much to be
beautiful.  If it were not for the running-ground at Eton, the
towing-path at Oxford, the Thames swimming-baths, and the yearly
circuses, humanity would forget the plastic perfection of its own form,
and degenerate into a race of short-sighted professors and spectacled
_précieuses_.  Not that the circus proprietors are, as a rule, conscious
of their high mission.  Do they not bore us with the _haute école_, and
weary us with Shakespearean clowns?  Still, at least, they give us
acrobats, and the acrobat is an artist.  The mere fact that he never
speaks to the audience shows how well he appreciates the great truth that
the aim of art is not to reveal personality but to please.  The clown may
be blatant, but the acrobat is always beautiful.  He is an interesting
combination of the spirit of Greek sculpture with the spangles of the
modern costumier.  He has even had his niche in the novels of our age,
and if _Manette Salomon_ be the unmasking of the model, _Les Frères
Zemganno_ is the apotheosis of the acrobat.

As regards the influence of the ordinary model on our English school of
painting, it cannot be said that it is altogether good.  It is, of
course, an advantage for the young artist sitting in his studio to be
able to isolate ‘a little corner of life,’ as the French say, from
disturbing surroundings, and to study it under certain effects of light
and shade.  But this very isolation leads often to mere mannerism in the
painter, and robs him of that broad acceptance of the general facts of
life which is the very essence of art.  Model-painting, in a word, while
it may be the condition of art, is not by any means its aim.

It is simply practice, not perfection.  Its use trains the eye and the
hand of the painter, its abuse produces in his work an effect of mere
posing and prettiness.  It is the secret of much of the artificiality of
modern art, this constant posing of pretty people, and when art becomes
artificial it becomes monotonous.  Outside the little world of the
studio, with its draperies and its _bric-à-brac_, lies the world of life
with its infinite, its Shakespearean variety.  We must, however,
distinguish between the two kinds of models, those who sit for the figure
and those who sit for the costume.  The study of the first is always
excellent, but the costume-model is becoming rather wearisome in modern
pictures.  It is really of very little use to dress up a London girl in
Greek draperies and to paint her as a goddess.  The robe may be the robe
of Athens, but the face is usually the face of Brompton.  Now and then,
it is true, one comes across a model whose face is an exquisite
anachronism, and who looks lovely and natural in the dress of any century
but her own.  This, however, is rather rare.  As a rule models are
absolutely _de notre siècle_, and should be painted as such.
Unfortunately they are not, and, as a consequence, we are shown every
year a series of scenes from fancy dress balls which are called
historical pictures, but are little more than mediocre representations of
modern people masquerading.  In France they are wiser.  The French
painter uses the model simply for study; for the finished picture he goes
direct to life.

However, we must not blame the sitters for the shortcomings of the
artists.  The English models are a well-behaved and hard-working class,
and if they are more interested in artists than in art, a large section
of the public is in the same condition, and most of our modern
exhibitions seem to justify its choice.




POEMS IN PROSE


_Fortnight Review_, July 1894.



THE ARTIST


ONE evening there came into his soul the desire to fashion an image of
_The Pleasure that abideth for a Moment_.  And he went forth into the
world to look for bronze.  For he could think only in bronze.

But all the bronze of the whole world had disappeared, nor anywhere in
the whole world was there any bronze to be found, save only the bronze of
the image of _The Sorrow that endureth for Ever_.

Now this image he had himself, and with his own hands, fashioned, and had
set it on the tomb of the one thing he had loved in life.  On the tomb of
the dead thing he had most loved had he set this image of his own
fashioning, that it might serve as a sign of the love of man that dieth
not, and a symbol of the sorrow of man that endureth for ever.  And in
the whole world there was no other bronze save the bronze of this image.

And he took the image he had fashioned, and set it in a great furnace,
and gave it to the fire.

And out of the bronze of the image of _The Sorrow that endureth for Ever_
he fashioned an image of _The Pleasure that abideth for a Moment_.



THE DOER OF GOOD


It was night-time and He was alone.

And He saw afar-off the walls of a round city and went towards the city.

And when He came near He heard within the city the tread of the feet of
joy, and the laughter of the mouth of gladness and the loud noise of many
lutes.  And He knocked at the gate and certain of the gate-keepers opened
to Him.

And He beheld a house that was of marble and had fair pillars of marble
before it.  The pillars were hung with garlands, and within and without
there were torches of cedar.  And He entered the house.

And when He had passed through the hall of chalcedony and the hall of
jasper, and reached the long hall of feasting, He saw lying on a couch of
sea-purple one whose hair was crowned with red roses and whose lips were
red with wine.

And He went behind him and touched him on the shoulder and said to him,
‘Why do you live like this?’

And the young man turned round and recognised Him, and made answer and
said, ‘But I was a leper once, and you healed me.  How else should I
live?’

And He passed out of the house and went again into the street.

And after a little while He saw one whose face and raiment were painted
and whose feet were shod with pearls.  And behind her came, slowly as a
hunter, a young man who wore a cloak of two colours.  Now the face of the
woman was as the fair face of an idol, and the eyes of the young man were
bright with lust.

And He followed swiftly and touched the hand of the young man and said to
him, ‘Why do you look at this woman and in such wise?’

And the young man turned round and recognised Him and said, ‘But I was
blind once, and you gave me sight.  At what else should I look?’

And He ran forward and touched the painted raiment of the woman and said
to her, ‘Is there no other way in which to walk save the way of sin?’

And the woman turned round and recognised Him, and laughed and said, ‘But
you forgave me my sins, and the way is a pleasant way.’

And He passed out of the city.

And when He had passed out of the city He saw seated by the roadside a
young man who was weeping.

And He went towards him and touched the long locks of his hair and said
to him, ‘Why are you weeping?’

And the young man looked up and recognised Him and made answer, ‘But I
was dead once, and you raised me from the dead.  What else should I do
but weep?’



THE DISCIPLE


When Narcissus died the pool of his pleasure changed from a cup of sweet
waters into a cup of salt tears, and the Oreads came weeping through the
woodland that they might sing to the pool and give it comfort.

And when they saw that the pool had changed from a cup of sweet waters
into a cup of salt tears, they loosened the green tresses of their hair
and cried to the pool and said, ‘We do not wonder that you should mourn
in this manner for Narcissus, so beautiful was he.’

‘But was Narcissus beautiful?’ said the pool.

‘Who should know that better than you?’ answered the Oreads.  ‘Us did he
ever pass by, but you he sought for, and would lie on your banks and look
down at you, and in the mirror of your waters he would mirror his own
beauty.’

And the pool answered, ‘But I loved Narcissus because, as he lay on my
banks and looked down at me, in the mirror of his eyes I saw ever my own
beauty mirrored.’



THE MASTER


Now when the darkness came over the earth Joseph of Arimathea, having
lighted a torch of pinewood, passed down from the hill into the valley.
For he had business in his own home.

And kneeling on the flint stones of the Valley of Desolation he saw a
young man who was naked and weeping.  His hair was the colour of honey,
and his body was as a white flower, but he had wounded his body with
thorns and on his hair had he set ashes as a crown.

And he who had great possessions said to the young man who was naked and
weeping, ‘I do not wonder that your sorrow is so great, for surely He was
a just man.’

And the young man answered, ‘It is not for Him that I am weeping, but for
myself.  I too have changed water into wine, and I have healed the leper
and given sight to the blind.  I have walked upon the waters, and from
the dwellers in the tombs I have cast out devils.  I have fed the hungry
in the desert where there was no food, and I have raised the dead from
their narrow houses, and at my bidding, and before a great multitude, of
people, a barren fig-tree withered away.  All things that this man has
done I have done also.  And yet they have not crucified me.’



THE HOUSE OF JUDGMENT


And there was silence in the House of Judgment, and the Man came naked
before God.

And God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

And God said to the Man, ‘Thy life hath been evil, and thou hast shown
cruelty to those who were in need of succour, and to those who lacked
help thou hast been bitter and hard of heart.  The poor called to thee
and thou didst not hearken, and thine ears were closed to the cry of My
afflicted.  The inheritance of the fatherless thou didst take unto
thyself, and thou didst send the foxes into the vineyard of thy
neighbour’s field.  Thou didst take the bread of the children and give it
to the dogs to eat, and My lepers who lived in the marshes, and were at
peace and praised Me, thou didst drive forth on to the highways, and on
Mine earth out of which I made thee thou didst spill innocent blood.’

And the Man made answer and said, ‘Even so did I.’

And again God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

And God said to the Man, ‘Thy life hath been evil, and the Beauty I have
shown thou hast sought for, and the Good I have hidden thou didst pass
by.  The walls of thy chamber were painted with images, and from the bed
of thine abominations thou didst rise up to the sound of flutes.  Thou
didst build seven altars to the sins I have suffered, and didst eat of
the thing that may not be eaten, and the purple of thy raiment was
broidered with the three signs of shame.  Thine idols were neither of
gold nor of silver that endure, but of flesh that dieth.  Thou didst
stain their hair with perfumes and put pomegranates in their hands.  Thou
didst stain their feet with saffron and spread carpets before them.  With
antimony thou didst stain their eyelids and their bodies thou didst smear
with myrrh.  Thou didst bow thyself to the ground before them, and the
thrones of thine idols were set in the sun.  Thou didst show to the sun
thy shame and to the moon thy madness.’

And the Man made answer and said, ‘Even so did I.’

And a third time God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

And God said to the Man, ‘Evil hath been thy life, and with evil didst
thou requite good, and with wrongdoing kindness.  The hands that fed thee
thou didst wound, and the breasts that gave thee suck thou didst despise.
He who came to thee with water went away thirsting, and the outlawed men
who hid thee in their tents at night thou didst betray before dawn.
Thine enemy who spared thee thou didst snare in an ambush, and the friend
who walked with thee thou didst sell for a price, and to those who
brought thee Love thou didst ever give Lust in thy turn.’

And the Man made answer and said, ‘Even so did I.’

And God closed the Book of the Life of the Man, and said, ‘Surely I will
send thee into Hell.  Even into Hell will I send thee.’

And the Man cried out, ‘Thou canst not.’

And God said to the Man, ‘Wherefore can I not send thee to Hell, and for
what reason?’

‘Because in Hell have I always lived,’ answered the Man.

And there was silence in the House of Judgment.

And after a space God spake, and said to the Man, ‘Seeing that I may not
send thee into Hell, surely I will send thee unto Heaven.  Even unto
Heaven will I send thee.’

And the Man cried out, ‘Thou canst not.’

And God said to the Man, ‘Wherefore can I not send thee unto Heaven, and
for what reason?’

‘Because never, and in no place, have I been able to imagine it,’
answered the Man.

And there was silence in the House of Judgment.



THE TEACHER OF WISDOM


From his childhood he had been as one filled with the perfect knowledge
of God, and even while he was yet but a lad many of the saints, as well
as certain holy women who dwelt in the free city of his birth, had been
stirred to much wonder by the grave wisdom of his answers.

And when his parents had given him the robe and the ring of manhood he
kissed them, and left them and went out into the world, that he might
speak to the world about God.  For there were at that time many in the
world who either knew not God at all, or had but an incomplete knowledge
of Him, or worshipped the false gods who dwell in groves and have no care
of their worshippers.

And he set his face to the sun and journeyed, walking without sandals, as
he had seen the saints walk, and carrying at his girdle a leathern wallet
and a little water-bottle of burnt clay.

And as he walked along the highway he was full of the joy that comes from
the perfect knowledge of God, and he sang praises unto God without
ceasing; and after a time he reached a strange land in which there were
many cities.

And he passed through eleven cities.  And some of these cities were in
valleys, and others were by the banks of great rivers, and others were
set on hills.  And in each city he found a disciple who loved him and
followed him, and a great multitude also of people followed him from each
city, and the knowledge of God spread in the whole land, and many of the
rulers were converted, and the priests of the temples in which there were
idols found that half of their gain was gone, and when they beat upon
their drums at noon none, or but a few, came with peacocks and with
offerings of flesh as had been the custom of the land before his coming.

Yet the more the people followed him, and the greater the number of his
disciples, the greater became his sorrow.  And he knew not why his sorrow
was so great.  For he spake ever about God, and out of the fulness of
that perfect knowledge of God which God had Himself given to him.

And one evening he passed out of the eleventh city, which was a city of
Armenia, and his disciples and a great crowd of people followed after
him; and he went up on to a mountain and sat down on a rock that was on
the mountain, and his disciples stood round him, and the multitude knelt
in the valley.

And he bowed his head on his hands and wept, and said to his Soul, ‘Why
is it that I am full of sorrow and fear, and that each of my disciples is
an enemy that walks in the noonday?’  And his Soul answered him and said,
‘God filled thee with the perfect knowledge of Himself, and thou hast
given this knowledge away to others.  The pearl of great price thou hast
divided, and the vesture without seam thou hast parted asunder.  He who
giveth away wisdom robbeth himself.  He is as one who giveth his treasure
to a robber.  Is not God wiser than thou art?  Who art thou to give away
the secret that God hath told thee?  I was rich once, and thou hast made
me poor.  Once I saw God, and now thou hast hidden Him from me.’

And he wept again, for he knew that his Soul spake truth to him, and that
he had given to others the perfect knowledge of God, and that he was as
one clinging to the skirts of God, and that his faith was leaving him by
reason of the number of those who believed in him.

And he said to himself, ‘I will talk no more about God.  He who giveth
away wisdom robbeth himself.’

And after the space of some hours his disciples came near him and bowed
themselves to the ground and said, ‘Master, talk to us about God, for
thou hast the perfect knowledge of God, and no man save thee hath this
knowledge.’

And he answered them and said, ‘I will talk to you about all other things
that are in heaven and on earth, but about God I will not talk to you.
Neither now, nor at any time, will I talk to you about God.’

And they were wroth with him and said to him, ‘Thou hast led us into the
desert that we might hearken to thee.  Wilt thou send us away hungry, and
the great multitude that thou hast made to follow thee?’

And he answered them and said, ‘I will not talk to you about God.’

And the multitude murmured against him and said to him, ‘Thou hast led us
into the desert, and hast given us no food to eat.  Talk to us about God
and it will suffice us.’

But he answered them not a word.  For he knew that if he spake to them
about God he would give away his treasure.

And his disciples went away sadly, and the multitude of people returned
to their own homes.  And many died on the way.

And when he was alone he rose up and set his face to the moon, and
journeyed for seven moons, speaking to no man nor making any answer.  And
when the seventh moon had waned he reached that desert which is the
desert of the Great River.  And having found a cavern in which a Centaur
had once dwelt, he took it for his place of dwelling, and made himself a
mat of reeds on which to lie, and became a hermit.  And every hour the
Hermit praised God that He had suffered him to keep some knowledge of Him
and of His wonderful greatness.

Now, one evening, as the Hermit was seated before the cavern in which he
had made his place of dwelling, he beheld a young man of evil and
beautiful face who passed by in mean apparel and with empty hands.  Every
evening with empty hands the young man passed by, and every morning he
returned with his hands full of purple and pearls.  For he was a Robber
and robbed the caravans of the merchants.

And the Hermit looked at him and pitied him.  But he spake not a word.
For he knew that he who speaks a word loses his faith.

And one morning, as the young man returned with his hands full of purple
and pearls, he stopped and frowned and stamped his foot upon the sand,
and said to the Hermit: ‘Why do you look at me ever in this manner as I
pass by?  What is it that I see in your eyes?  For no man has looked at
me before in this manner.  And the thing is a thorn and a trouble to me.’

And the Hermit answered him and said, ‘What you see in my eyes is pity.
Pity is what looks out at you from my eyes.’

And the young man laughed with scorn, and cried to the Hermit in a bitter
voice, and said to him, ‘I have purple and pearls in my hands, and you
have but a mat of reeds on which to lie.  What pity should you have for
me?  And for what reason have you this pity?’

‘I have pity for you,’ said the Hermit, ‘because you have no knowledge of
God.’

‘Is this knowledge of God a precious thing?’ asked the young man, and he
came close to the mouth of the cavern.

‘It is more precious than all the purple and the pearls of the world,’
answered the Hermit.

‘And have you got it?’ said the young Robber, and he came closer still.

‘Once, indeed,’ answered the Hermit, ‘I possessed the perfect knowledge
of God.  But in my foolishness I parted with it, and divided it amongst
others.  Yet even now is such knowledge as remains to me more precious
than purple or pearls.’

And when the young Robber heard this he threw away the purple and the
pearls that he was bearing in his hands, and drawing a sharp sword of
curved steel he said to the Hermit, ‘Give me, forthwith this knowledge of
God that you possess, or I will surely slay you.  Wherefore should I not
slay him who has a treasure greater than my treasure?’

And the Hermit spread out his arms and said, ‘Were it not better for me
to go unto the uttermost courts of God and praise Him, than to live in
the world and have no knowledge of Him?  Slay me if that be your desire.
But I will not give away my knowledge of God.’

And the young Robber knelt down and besought him, but the Hermit would
not talk to him about God, nor give him his Treasure, and the young
Robber rose up and said to the Hermit, ‘Be it as you will.  As for
myself, I will go to the City of the Seven Sins, that is but three days’
journey from this place, and for my purple they will give me pleasure,
and for my pearls they will sell me joy.’  And he took up the purple and
the pearls and went swiftly away.

And the Hermit cried out and followed him and besought him.  For the
space of three days he followed the young Robber on the road and
entreated him to return, nor to enter into the City of the Seven Sins.

And ever and anon the young Robber looked back at the Hermit and called
to him, and said, ‘Will you give me this knowledge of God which is more
precious than purple and pearls?  If you will give me that, I will not
enter the city.’

And ever did the Hermit answer, ‘All things that I have I will give thee,
save that one thing only.  For that thing it is not lawful for me to give
away.’

And in the twilight of the third day they came nigh to the great scarlet
gates of the City of the Seven Sins.  And from the city there came the
sound of much laughter.

And the young Robber laughed in answer, and sought to knock at the gate.
And as he did so the Hermit ran forward and caught him by the skirts of
his raiment, and said to him: ‘Stretch forth your hands, and set your
arms around my neck, and put your ear close to my lips, and I will give
you what remains to me of the knowledge of God.’  And the young Robber
stopped.

And when the Hermit had given away his knowledge of God, he fell upon the
ground and wept, and a great darkness hid from him the city and the young
Robber, so that he saw them no more.

And as he lay there weeping he was ware of One who was standing beside
him; and He who was standing beside him had feet of brass and hair like
fine wool.  And He raised the Hermit up, and said to him: ‘Before this
time thou hadst the perfect knowledge of God.  Now thou shalt have the
perfect love of God.  Wherefore art thou weeping?’  And he kissed him.




FOOTNOTES


{29}  Plato’s _Laws_; Æschylus’ _Prometheus Bound_.

{31}  Somewhat in the same spirit Plato, in his _Laws_, appeals to the
local position of Ilion among the rivers of the plain, as a proof that it
was not built till long after the Deluge.

{32}  Plutarch remarks that the _only_ evidence Greece possesses of the
truth that the legendary power of Athens is no ‘romance or idle story,’
is the public and sacred buildings.  This is an instance of the
exaggerated importance given to ruins against which Thucydides is warning
us.

{37}  The fictitious sale in the Roman marriage _per coemptionem_ was
originally, of course, a real sale.

{43}  Notably, of course, in the case of heat and its laws.

{57}  Cousin errs a good deal in this respect.  To say, as he did, ‘Give
me the latitude and the longitude of a country, its rivers and its
mountains, and I will deduce the race,’ is surely a glaring exaggeration.

{59}  The monarchical, aristocratical, and democratic elements of the
Roman constitution are referred to.

{63a}  Polybius, vi. 9.  _αὔτη πολιτειῶν ἀνακύκλωσις_, _αὔτς φύσεως
οἰκονομία_.

{63b}  _χωρὶς ὀργῆς ἢ φθόνου ποιούμεηος τὴν ἀπόφασιν_.

{63c}  The various stages are _σύστασις_, _αὔξησις_, _ἀκμή_, _μεταβολὴ
ἐις τοὔμπαλιν_.

{68}  Polybius, xii. 24.

{69a}  Polybius, i. 4, viii. 4, specially; and really _passim_.

{69b}  He makes one exception.

{69c}  Polybius, viii. 4.

{71}  Polybius, xvi. 12.

{72a}  Polybius, viii. 4: _τὸ παραδοξάτον καθ’ ἡμᾶς ἔργον ἡ τύχη
συνετέλεσε_; _τοῦτο δ’ ἔστι τὸ πάντα τὰ γνωριζόμενα μέρη τῆς οἰκουμένης
ὑπὸ μίαν ἀρχὴν καὶ δυναστείαν ἀγαγεῖν_, _ὂ πρότερον οὐχ εὑρίσκεται
γεγονός_.

{72b}  Polybius resembled Gibbon in many respects.  Like him he held that
all religions were to the philosopher equally false, to the vulgar
equally true, to the statesman equally useful.

{76}  Cf. Polybius, xii. 25, _ἐπεὶ ψιλῶς λεγόμενον αὐτὄ γεγονὸς ψυχαγωγεῖ
μέν_, _ὠφελεῖ δ’ οὐδέν_·  _προστεθείσης δὲ τῆς αἰτίας ἔγκαρπος ἡ τῆς
ἱστορίας γίγνεται χρῆσις_.

{78}  Polybius, xxii. 8.

{81}  I mean particularly as regards his sweeping denunciation of the
complete moral decadence of Greek society during the Peloponnesain War,
which, from what remains to us of Athenian literature, we know must have
been completely exaggerated.  Or, rather, he is looking at men merely in
their political dealings: and in politics the man who is personally
honourable and refined will not scruple to do anything for his party.

{86}  Polybius, xii. 25.

{124}  As an instance of the inaccuracy of published reports of this
lecture, it may be mentioned that all unauthorised versions give this
passage as _The artist may trace the depressed revolution of Bunthorne
simply to the lack of technical means_!

{206}  _The Two Paths_, Lect. iii. p. 123 (1859 ed.).

HIGH above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the Happy
Prince.  He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold, for eyes
he had two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed on his
sword-hilt.

He was very much admired indeed.  “He is as beautiful as a weathercock,”
remarked one of the Town Councillors who wished to gain a reputation for
having artistic tastes; “only not quite so useful,” he added, fearing
lest people should think him unpractical, which he really was not.

“Why can’t you be like the Happy Prince?” asked a sensible mother of her
little boy who was crying for the moon.  “The Happy Prince never dreams
of crying for anything.”

“I am glad there is some one in the world who is quite happy,” muttered a
disappointed man as he gazed at the wonderful statue.

“He looks just like an angel,” said the Charity Children as they came out
of the cathedral in their bright scarlet cloaks and their clean white
pinafores.

“How do you know?” said the Mathematical Master, “you have never seen
one.”

“Ah! but we have, in our dreams,” answered the children; and the
Mathematical Master frowned and looked very severe, for he did not
approve of children dreaming.

One night there flew over the city a little Swallow.  His friends had
gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed behind, for he was
in love with the most beautiful Reed.  He had met her early in the spring
as he was flying down the river after a big yellow moth, and had been so
attracted by her slender waist that he had stopped to talk to her.

“Shall I love you?” said the Swallow, who liked to come to the point at
once, and the Reed made him a low bow.  So he flew round and round her,
touching the water with his wings, and making silver ripples.  This was
his courtship, and it lasted all through the summer.

“It is a ridiculous attachment,” twittered the other Swallows; “she has
no money, and far too many relations”; and indeed the river was quite
full of Reeds.  Then, when the autumn came they all flew away.

After they had gone he felt lonely, and began to tire of his lady-love.
“She has no conversation,” he said, “and I am afraid that she is a
coquette, for she is always flirting with the wind.”  And certainly,
whenever the wind blew, the Reed made the most graceful curtseys.  “I
admit that she is domestic,” he continued, “but I love travelling, and my
wife, consequently, should love travelling also.”

“Will you come away with me?” he said finally to her; but the Reed shook
her head, she was so attached to her home.

“You have been trifling with me,” he cried.  “I am off to the Pyramids.
Good-bye!” and he flew away.

All day long he flew, and at night-time he arrived at the city.  “Where
shall I put up?” he said; “I hope the town has made preparations.”

Then he saw the statue on the tall column.

“I will put up there,” he cried; “it is a fine position, with plenty of
fresh air.”  So he alighted just between the feet of the Happy Prince.

“I have a golden bedroom,” he said softly to himself as he looked round,
and he prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under
his wing a large drop of water fell on him.  “What a curious thing!” he
cried; “there is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are quite clear
and bright, and yet it is raining.  The climate in the north of Europe is
really dreadful.  The Reed used to like the rain, but that was merely her
selfishness.”

Then another drop fell.

“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off?” he said; “I
must look for a good chimney-pot,” and he determined to fly away.

But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he looked up,
and saw—Ah! what did he see?

The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears were
running down his golden cheeks.  His face was so beautiful in the
moonlight that the little Swallow was filled with pity.

“Who are you?” he said.

“I am the Happy Prince.”

“Why are you weeping then?” asked the Swallow; “you have quite drenched
me.”

“When I was alive and had a human heart,” answered the statue, “I did not
know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace of Sans-Souci, where
sorrow is not allowed to enter.  In the daytime I played with my
companions in the garden, and in the evening I led the dance in the Great
Hall.  Round the garden ran a very lofty wall, but I never cared to ask
what lay beyond it, everything about me was so beautiful.  My courtiers
called me the Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was, if pleasure be
happiness.  So I lived, and so I died.  And now that I am dead they have
set me up here so high that I can see all the ugliness and all the misery
of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot chose but
weep.”

“What! is he not solid gold?” said the Swallow to himself.  He was too
polite to make any personal remarks out loud.

“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far away in a
little street there is a poor house.  One of the windows is open, and
through it I can see a woman seated at a table.  Her face is thin and
worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she
is a seamstress.  She is embroidering passion-flowers on a satin gown for
the loveliest of the Queen’s maids-of-honour to wear at the next
Court-ball.  In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying
ill.  He has a fever, and is asking for oranges.  His mother has nothing
to give him but river water, so he is crying.  Swallow, Swallow, little
Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?  My feet
are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move.”

“I am waited for in Egypt,” said the Swallow.  “My friends are flying up
and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-flowers.  Soon they
will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.  The King is there
himself in his painted coffin.  He is wrapped in yellow linen, and
embalmed with spices.  Round his neck is a chain of pale green jade, and
his hands are like withered leaves.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me for one night, and be my messenger?  The boy is so thirsty, and
the mother so sad.”

“I don’t think I like boys,” answered the Swallow.  “Last summer, when I
was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the miller’s sons,
who were always throwing stones at me.  They never hit me, of course; we
swallows fly far too well for that, and besides, I come of a family
famous for its agility; but still, it was a mark of disrespect.”

But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was sorry.
“It is very cold here,” he said; “but I will stay with you for one night,
and be your messenger.”

“Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.

So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince’s sword, and
flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.

He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were
sculptured.  He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing.  A
beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.  “How wonderful
the stars are,” he said to her, “and how wonderful is the power of love!”

“I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball,” she answered;
“I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it; but the
seamstresses are so lazy.”

He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts of
the ships.  He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews bargaining
with each other, and weighing out money in copper scales.  At last he
came to the poor house and looked in.  The boy was tossing feverishly on
his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired.  In he
hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble.
Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy’s forehead with his
wings.  “How cool I feel,” said the boy, “I must be getting better”; and
he sank into a delicious slumber.

Then the Swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had
done.  “It is curious,” he remarked, “but I feel quite warm now, although
it is so cold.”

“That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.  And the
little Swallow began to think, and then he fell asleep.  Thinking always
made him sleepy.

When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.  “What a
remarkable phenomenon,” said the Professor of Ornithology as he was
passing over the bridge.  “A swallow in winter!”  And he wrote a long
letter about it to the local newspaper.  Every one quoted it, it was full
of so many words that they could not understand.

“To-night I go to Egypt,” said the Swallow, and he was in high spirits at
the prospect.  He visited all the public monuments, and sat a long time
on top of the church steeple.  Wherever he went the Sparrows chirruped,
and said to each other, “What a distinguished stranger!” so he enjoyed
himself very much.

When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.  “Have you any
commissions for Egypt?” he cried; “I am just starting.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me one night longer?”

“I am waited for in Egypt,” answered the Swallow.  “To-morrow my friends
will fly up to the Second Cataract.  The river-horse couches there among
the bulrushes, and on a great granite throne sits the God Memnon.  All
night long he watches the stars, and when the morning star shines he
utters one cry of joy, and then he is silent.  At noon the yellow lions
come down to the water’s edge to drink.  They have eyes like green
beryls, and their roar is louder than the roar of the cataract.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away across the
city I see a young man in a garret.  He is leaning over a desk covered
with papers, and in a tumbler by his side there is a bunch of withered
violets.  His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a
pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.  He is trying to finish a
play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any
more.  There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint.”

“I will wait with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, who really had
a good heart.  “Shall I take him another ruby?”

“Alas!  I have no ruby now,” said the Prince; “my eyes are all that I
have left.  They are made of rare sapphires, which were brought out of
India a thousand years ago.  Pluck out one of them and take it to him.
He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy food and firewood, and finish
his play.”

“Dear Prince,” said the Swallow, “I cannot do that”; and he began to
weep.

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command
you.”

So the Swallow plucked out the Prince’s eye, and flew away to the
student’s garret.  It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in
the roof.  Through this he darted, and came into the room.  The young man
had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the
bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying
on the withered violets.

“I am beginning to be appreciated,” he cried; “this is from some great
admirer.  Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.

The next day the Swallow flew down to the harbour.  He sat on the mast of
a large vessel and watched the sailors hauling big chests out of the hold
with ropes.  “Heave a-hoy!” they shouted as each chest came up.  “I am
going to Egypt”! cried the Swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon
rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.

“I am come to bid you good-bye,” he cried.

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you not stay
with me one night longer?”

“It is winter,” answered the Swallow, “and the chill snow will soon be
here.  In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm-trees, and the
crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.  My companions are
building a nest in the Temple of Baalbec, and the pink and white doves
are watching them, and cooing to each other.  Dear Prince, I must leave
you, but I will never forget you, and next spring I will bring you back
two beautiful jewels in place of those you have given away.  The ruby
shall be redder than a red rose, and the sapphire shall be as blue as the
great sea.”

“In the square below,” said the Happy Prince, “there stands a little
match-girl.  She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all
spoiled.  Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money,
and she is crying.  She has no shoes or stockings, and her little head is
bare.  Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will
not beat her.”

“I will stay with you one night longer,” said the Swallow, “but I cannot
pluck out your eye.  You would be quite blind then.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I command
you.”

So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down with it.  He
swooped past the match-girl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her
hand.  “What a lovely bit of glass,” cried the little girl; and she ran
home, laughing.

Then the Swallow came back to the Prince.  “You are blind now,” he said,
“so I will stay with you always.”

“No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away to Egypt.”

“I will stay with you always,” said the Swallow, and he slept at the
Prince’s feet.

All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder, and told him stories of
what he had seen in strange lands.  He told him of the red ibises, who
stand in long rows on the banks of the Nile, and catch gold-fish in their
beaks; of the Sphinx, who is as old as the world itself, and lives in the
desert, and knows everything; of the merchants, who walk slowly by the
side of their camels, and carry amber beads in their hands; of the King
of the Mountains of the Moon, who is as black as ebony, and worships a
large crystal; of the great green snake that sleeps in a palm-tree, and
has twenty priests to feed it with honey-cakes; and of the pygmies who
sail over a big lake on large flat leaves, and are always at war with the
butterflies.

“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous
things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and of
women.  There is no Mystery so great as Misery.  Fly over my city, little
Swallow, and tell me what you see there.”

So the Swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in
their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates.  He
flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children
looking out listlessly at the black streets.  Under the archway of a
bridge two little boys were lying in one another’s arms to try and keep
themselves warm.  “How hungry we are!” they said.  “You must not lie
here,” shouted the Watchman, and they wandered out into the rain.

Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.

“I am covered with fine gold,” said the Prince, “you must take it off,
leaf by leaf, and give it to my poor; the living always think that gold
can make them happy.”

Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the Swallow picked off, till the Happy
Prince looked quite dull and grey.  Leaf after leaf of the fine gold he
brought to the poor, and the children’s faces grew rosier, and they
laughed and played games in the street.  “We have bread now!” they cried.

Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost.  The streets
looked as if they were made of silver, they were so bright and
glistening; long icicles like crystal daggers hung down from the eaves of
the houses, everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore
scarlet caps and skated on the ice.

The poor little Swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave
the Prince, he loved him too well.  He picked up crumbs outside the
baker’s door when the baker was not looking and tried to keep himself
warm by flapping his wings.

But at last he knew that he was going to die.  He had just strength to
fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once more.  “Good-bye, dear Prince!” he
murmured, “will you let me kiss your hand?”

“I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,” said the
Prince, “you have stayed too long here; but you must kiss me on the lips,
for I love you.”

“It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the Swallow.  “I am going to
the House of Death.  Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?”

And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his
feet.

At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something
had broken.  The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two.
It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.

Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in
company with the Town Councillors.  As they passed the column he looked
up at the statue: “Dear me! how shabby the Happy Prince looks!” he said.

“How shabby indeed!” cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with
the Mayor; and they went up to look at it.

“The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is
golden no longer,” said the Mayor in fact, “he is litttle better than a
beggar!”

“Little better than a beggar,” said the Town Councillors.

“And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!” continued the Mayor.  “We
must really issue a proclamation that birds are not to be allowed to die
here.”  And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion.

So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince.  “As he is no longer
beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Professor at the
University.

Then they melted the statue in a furnace, and the Mayor held a meeting of
the Corporation to decide what was to be done with the metal.  “We must
have another statue, of course,” he said, “and it shall be a statue of
myself.”

“Of myself,” said each of the Town Councillors, and they quarrelled.
When I last heard of them they were quarrelling still.

“What a strange thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry.
“This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace.  We must throw it
away.”  So they threw it on a dust-heap where the dead Swallow was also
lying.

“Bring me the two most precious things in the city,” said God to one of
His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird.

“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my garden of Paradise this
little bird shall sing for evermore, and in my city of gold the Happy
Prince shall praise me.”

                




The Nightingale and the Rose.


        

“SHE said that she would dance with me if I brought her red roses,” cried
the young Student; “but in all my garden there is no red rose.”

From her nest in the holm-oak tree the Nightingale heard him, and she
looked out through the leaves, and wondered.

“No red rose in all my garden!” he cried, and his beautiful eyes filled
with tears.  “Ah, on what little things does happiness depend!  I have
read all that the wise men have written, and all the secrets of
philosophy are mine, yet for want of a red rose is my life made
wretched.”

“Here at last is a true lover,” said the Nightingale.  “Night after night
have I sung of him, though I knew him not: night after night have I told
his story to the stars, and now I see him.  His hair is dark as the
hyacinth-blossom, and his lips are red as the rose of his desire; but
passion has made his face like pale ivory, and sorrow has set her seal
upon his brow.”

“The Prince gives a ball to-morrow night,” murmured the young Student,
“and my love will be of the company.  If I bring her a red rose she will
dance with me till dawn.  If I bring her a red rose, I shall hold her in
my arms, and she will lean her head upon my shoulder, and her hand will
be clasped in mine.  But there is no red rose in my garden, so I shall
sit lonely, and she will pass me by.  She will have no heed of me, and my
heart will break.”

“Here indeed is the true lover,” said the Nightingale.  “What I sing of,
he suffers—what is joy to me, to him is pain.  Surely Love is a wonderful
thing.  It is more precious than emeralds, and dearer than fine opals.
Pearls and pomegranates cannot buy it, nor is it set forth in the
marketplace.  It may not be purchased of the merchants, nor can it be
weighed out in the balance for gold.”

“The musicians will sit in their gallery,” said the young Student, “and
play upon their stringed instruments, and my love will dance to the sound
of the harp and the violin.  She will dance so lightly that her feet will
not touch the floor, and the courtiers in their gay dresses will throng
round her.  But with me she will not dance, for I have no red rose to
give her”; and he flung himself down on the grass, and buried his face in
his hands, and wept.

“Why is he weeping?” asked a little Green Lizard, as he ran past him with
his tail in the air.

“Why, indeed?” said a Butterfly, who was fluttering about after a
sunbeam.

“Why, indeed?” whispered a Daisy to his neighbour, in a soft, low voice.

“He is weeping for a red rose,” said the Nightingale.

“For a red rose?” they cried; “how very ridiculous!” and the little
Lizard, who was something of a cynic, laughed outright.

But the Nightingale understood the secret of the Student’s sorrow, and
she sat silent in the oak-tree, and thought about the mystery of Love.

Suddenly she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.
She passed through the grove like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed
across the garden.

In the centre of the grass-plot was standing a beautiful Rose-tree, and
when she saw it she flew over to it, and lit upon a spray.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are white,” it answered; “as white as the foam of the sea, and
whiter than the snow upon the mountain.  But go to my brother who grows
round the old sun-dial, and perhaps he will give you what you want.”

So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing round the
old sun-dial.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are yellow,” it answered; “as yellow as the hair of the
mermaiden who sits upon an amber throne, and yellower than the daffodil
that blooms in the meadow before the mower comes with his scythe.  But go
to my brother who grows beneath the Student’s window, and perhaps he will
give you what you want.”

So the Nightingale flew over to the Rose-tree that was growing beneath
the Student’s window.

“Give me a red rose,” she cried, “and I will sing you my sweetest song.”

But the Tree shook its head.

“My roses are red,” it answered, “as red as the feet of the dove, and
redder than the great fans of coral that wave and wave in the
ocean-cavern.  But the winter has chilled my veins, and the frost has
nipped my buds, and the storm has broken my branches, and I shall have no
roses at all this year.”

“One red rose is all I want,” cried the Nightingale, “only one red rose!
Is there no way by which I can get it?”

“There is a way,” answered the Tree; “but it is so terrible that I dare
not tell it to you.”

“Tell it to me,” said the Nightingale, “I am not afraid.”

“If you want a red rose,” said the Tree, “you must build it out of music
by moonlight, and stain it with your own heart’s-blood.  You must sing to
me with your breast against a thorn.  All night long you must sing to me,
and the thorn must pierce your heart, and your life-blood must flow into
my veins, and become mine.”

“Death is a great price to pay for a red rose,” cried the Nightingale,
“and Life is very dear to all.  It is pleasant to sit in the green wood,
and to watch the Sun in his chariot of gold, and the Moon in her chariot
of pearl.  Sweet is the scent of the hawthorn, and sweet are the
bluebells that hide in the valley, and the heather that blows on the
hill.  Yet Love is better than Life, and what is the heart of a bird
compared to the heart of a man?”

So she spread her brown wings for flight, and soared into the air.  She
swept over the garden like a shadow, and like a shadow she sailed through
the grove.

The young Student was still lying on the grass, where she had left him,
and the tears were not yet dry in his beautiful eyes.

“Be happy,” cried the Nightingale, “be happy; you shall have your red
rose.  I will build it out of music by moonlight, and stain it with my
own heart’s-blood.  All that I ask of you in return is that you will be a
true lover, for Love is wiser than Philosophy, though she is wise, and
mightier than Power, though he is mighty.  Flame-coloured are his wings,
and coloured like flame is his body.  His lips are sweet as honey, and
his breath is like frankincense.”

The Student looked up from the grass, and listened, but he could not
understand what the Nightingale was saying to him, for he only knew the
things that are written down in books.

But the Oak-tree understood, and felt sad, for he was very fond of the
little Nightingale who had built her nest in his branches.

“Sing me one last song,” he whispered; “I shall feel very lonely when you
are gone.”

So the Nightingale sang to the Oak-tree, and her voice was like water
bubbling from a silver jar.

When she had finished her song the Student got up, and pulled a note-book
and a lead-pencil out of his pocket.

“She has form,” he said to himself, as he walked away through the
grove—“that cannot be denied to her; but has she got feeling?  I am
afraid not.  In fact, she is like most artists; she is all style, without
any sincerity.  She would not sacrifice herself for others.  She thinks
merely of music, and everybody knows that the arts are selfish.  Still,
it must be admitted that she has some beautiful notes in her voice.  What
a pity it is that they do not mean anything, or do any practical good.”
And he went into his room, and lay down on his little pallet-bed, and
began to think of his love; and, after a time, he fell asleep.

And when the Moon shone in the heavens the Nightingale flew to the
Rose-tree, and set her breast against the thorn.  All night long she sang
with her breast against the thorn, and the cold crystal Moon leaned down
and listened.  All night long she sang, and the thorn went deeper and
deeper into her breast, and her life-blood ebbed away from her.

She sang first of the birth of love in the heart of a boy and a girl.
And on the top-most spray of the Rose-tree there blossomed a marvellous
rose, petal following petal, as song followed song.  Pale was it, at
first, as the mist that hangs over the river—pale as the feet of the
morning, and silver as the wings of the dawn.  As the shadow of a rose in
a mirror of silver, as the shadow of a rose in a water-pool, so was the
rose that blossomed on the topmost spray of the Tree.

But the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come
before the rose is finished.”

So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and louder and
louder grew her song, for she sang of the birth of passion in the soul of
a man and a maid.

And a delicate flush of pink came into the leaves of the rose, like the
flush in the face of the bridegroom when he kisses the lips of the bride.
But the thorn had not yet reached her heart, so the rose’s heart remained
white, for only a Nightingale’s heart’s-blood can crimson the heart of a
rose.

And the Tree cried to the Nightingale to press closer against the thorn.
“Press closer, little Nightingale,” cried the Tree, “or the Day will come
before the rose is finished.”

So the Nightingale pressed closer against the thorn, and the thorn
touched her heart, and a fierce pang of pain shot through her.  Bitter,
bitter was the pain, and wilder and wilder grew her song, for she sang of
the Love that is perfected by Death, of the Love that dies not in the
tomb.

And the marvellous rose became crimson, like the rose of the eastern sky.
Crimson was the girdle of petals, and crimson as a ruby was the heart.

But the Nightingale’s voice grew fainter, and her little wings began to
beat, and a film came over her eyes.  Fainter and fainter grew her song,
and she felt something choking her in her throat.

Then she gave one last burst of music.  The white Moon heard it, and she
forgot the dawn, and lingered on in the sky.  The red rose heard it, and
it trembled all over with ecstasy, and opened its petals to the cold
morning air.  Echo bore it to her purple cavern in the hills, and woke
the sleeping shepherds from their dreams.  It floated through the reeds
of the river, and they carried its message to the sea.

“Look, look!” cried the Tree, “the rose is finished now”; but the
Nightingale made no answer, for she was lying dead in the long grass,
with the thorn in her heart.

And at noon the Student opened his window and looked out.

“Why, what a wonderful piece of luck!” he cried; “here is a red rose!  I
have never seen any rose like it in all my life.  It is so beautiful that
I am sure it has a long Latin name”; and he leaned down and plucked it.

Then he put on his hat, and ran up to the Professor’s house with the rose
in his hand.

The daughter of the Professor was sitting in the doorway winding blue
silk on a reel, and her little dog was lying at her feet.

“You said that you would dance with me if I brought you a red rose,”
cried the Student.  “Here is the reddest rose in all the world.  You will
wear it to-night next your heart, and as we dance together it will tell
you how I love you.”

But the girl frowned.

“I am afraid it will not go with my dress,” she answered; “and, besides,
the Chamberlain’s nephew has sent me some real jewels, and everybody
knows that jewels cost far more than flowers.”

“Well, upon my word, you are very ungrateful,” said the Student angrily;
and he threw the rose into the street, where it fell into the gutter, and
a cart-wheel went over it.

“Ungrateful!” said the girl.  “I tell you what, you are very rude; and,
after all, who are you?  Only a Student.  Why, I don’t believe you have
even got silver buckles to your shoes as the Chamberlain’s nephew has”;
and she got up from her chair and went into the house.

“What a silly thing Love is,” said the Student as he walked away.  “It
is not half as useful as Logic, for it does not prove anything, and it is
always telling one of things that are not going to happen, and making one
believe things that are not true.  In fact, it is quite unpractical, and,
as in this age to be practical is everything, I shall go back to
Philosophy and study Metaphysics.”

So he returned to his room and pulled out a great dusty book, and began
to read.

          




The Selfish Giant.


                       

EVERY afternoon, as they were coming from school, the children used to go
and play in the Giant’s garden.

It was a large lovely garden, with soft green grass.  Here and there over
the grass stood beautiful flowers like stars, and there were twelve
peach-trees that in the spring-time broke out into delicate blossoms of
pink and pearl, and in the autumn bore rich fruit.  The birds sat on the
trees and sang so sweetly that the children used to stop their games in
order to listen to them.  “How happy we are here!” they cried to each
other.

           

One day the Giant came back.  He had been to visit his friend the Cornish
ogre, and had stayed with him for seven years.  After the seven years
were over he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was
limited, and he determined to return to his own castle.  When he arrived
he saw the children playing in the garden.

“What are you doing here?” he cried in a very gruff voice, and the
children ran away.

“My own garden is my own garden,” said the Giant; “any one can understand
that, and I will allow nobody to play in it but myself.”  So he built a
high wall all round it, and put up a notice-board.

          TRESPASSERS

            WILL BE

           PROSECUTED

He was a very selfish Giant.

The poor children had now nowhere to play.  They tried to play on the
road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and they did
not like it.  They used to wander round the high wall when their lessons
were over, and talk about the beautiful garden inside.  “How happy we
were there,” they said to each other.

Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little blossoms
and little birds.  Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant it was still
winter.  The birds did not care to sing in it as there were no children,
and the trees forgot to blossom.  Once a beautiful flower put its head
out from the grass, but when it saw the notice-board it was so sorry for
the children that it slipped back into the ground again, and went off to
sleep.  The only people who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost.
“Spring has forgotten this garden,” they cried, “so we will live here all
the year round.”  The Snow covered up the grass with her great white
cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver.  Then they invited the
North Wind to stay with them, and he came.  He was wrapped in furs, and
he roared all day about the garden, and blew the chimney-pots down.
“This is a delightful spot,” he said, “we must ask the Hail on a visit.”
So the Hail came.  Every day for three hours he rattled on the roof of
the castle till he broke most of the slates, and then he ran round and
round the garden as fast as he could go.  He was dressed in grey, and his
breath was like ice.

“I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming,” said the
Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold white
garden; “I hope there will be a change in the weather.”

But the Spring never came, nor the Summer.  The Autumn gave golden fruit
to every garden, but to the Giant’s garden she gave none.  “He is too
selfish,” she said.  So it was always Winter there, and the North Wind,
and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced about through the trees.

One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some lovely
music.  It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it must be the
King’s musicians passing by.  It was really only a little linnet singing
outside his window, but it was so long since he had heard a bird sing in
his garden that it seemed to him to be the most beautiful music in the
world.  Then the Hail stopped dancing over his head, and the North Wind
ceased roaring, and a delicious perfume came to him through the open
casement.  “I believe the Spring has come at last,” said the Giant; and
he jumped out of bed and looked out.

What did he see?

He saw a most wonderful sight.  Through a little hole in the wall the
children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of the
trees.  In every tree that he could see there was a little child.  And
the trees were so glad to have the children back again that they had
covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving their arms gently above
the children’s heads.  The birds were flying about and twittering with
delight, and the flowers were looking up through the green grass and
laughing.  It was a lovely scene, only in one corner it was still winter.
It was the farthest corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little
boy.  He was so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the
tree, and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.  The poor tree
was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was
blowing and roaring above it.  “Climb up! little boy,” said the Tree, and
it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy was too tiny.

And the Giant’s heart melted as he looked out.  “How selfish I have
been!” he said; “now I know why the Spring would not come here.  I will
put that poor little boy on the top of the tree, and then I will knock
down the wall, and my garden shall be the children’s playground for ever
and ever.”  He was really very sorry for what he had done.

So he crept downstairs and opened the front door quite softly, and went
out into the garden.  But when the children saw him they were so
frightened that they all ran away, and the garden became winter again.
Only the little boy did not run, for his eyes were so full of tears that
he did not see the Giant coming.  And the Giant stole up behind him and
took him gently in his hand, and put him up into the tree.  And the tree
broke at once into blossom, and the birds came and sang on it, and the
little boy stretched out his two arms and flung them round the Giant’s
neck, and kissed him.  And the other children, when they saw that the
Giant was not wicked any longer, came running back, and with them came
the Spring.  “It is your garden now, little children,” said the Giant,
and he took a great axe and knocked down the wall.  And when the people
were going to market at twelve o’clock they found the Giant playing with
the children in the most beautiful garden they had ever seen.

All day long they played, and in the evening they came to the Giant to
bid him good-bye.

“But where is your little companion?” he said: “the boy I put into the
tree.”  The Giant loved him the best because he had kissed him.

“We don’t know,” answered the children; “he has gone away.”

“You must tell him to be sure and come here to-morrow,” said the Giant.
But the children said that they did not know where he lived, and had
never seen him before; and the Giant felt very sad.

Every afternoon, when school was over, the children came and played with
the Giant.  But the little boy whom the Giant loved was never seen again.
The Giant was very kind to all the children, yet he longed for his first
little friend, and often spoke of him.  “How I would like to see him!” he
used to say.

Years went over, and the Giant grew very old and feeble.  He could not
play about any more, so he sat in a huge armchair, and watched the
children at their games, and admired his garden.  “I have many beautiful
flowers,” he said; “but the children are the most beautiful flowers of
all.”

One winter morning he looked out of his window as he was dressing.  He
did not hate the Winter now, for he knew that it was merely the Spring
asleep, and that the flowers were resting.

Suddenly he rubbed his eyes in wonder, and looked and looked.  It
certainly was a marvellous sight.  In the farthest corner of the garden
was a tree quite covered with lovely white blossoms.  Its branches were
all golden, and silver fruit hung down from them, and underneath it stood
the little boy he had loved.

Downstairs ran the Giant in great joy, and out into the garden.  He
hastened across the grass, and came near to the child.  And when he came
quite close his face grew red with anger, and he said, “Who hath dared to
wound thee?”  For on the palms of the child’s hands were the prints of
two nails, and the prints of two nails were on the little feet.

“Who hath dared to wound thee?” cried the Giant; “tell me, that I may
take my big sword and slay him.”

“Nay!” answered the child; “but these are the wounds of Love.”

“Who art thou?” said the Giant, and a strange awe fell on him, and he
knelt before the little child.

And the child smiled on the Giant, and said to him, “You let me play once
in your garden, to-day you shall come with me to my garden, which is
Paradise.”

And when the children ran in that afternoon, they found the Giant lying
dead under the tree, all covered with white blossoms.

                 




The Devoted Friend.


                      

ONE morning the old Water-rat put his head out of his hole.  He had
bright beady eyes and stiff grey whiskers and his tail was like a long
bit of black india-rubber.  The little ducks were swimming about in the
pond, looking just like a lot of yellow canaries, and their mother, who
was pure white with real red legs, was trying to teach them how to stand
on their heads in the water.

“You will never be in the best society unless you can stand on your
heads,” she kept saying to them; and every now and then she showed them
how it was done.  But the little ducks paid no attention to her.  They
were so young that they did not know what an advantage it is to be in
society at all.

“What disobedient children!” cried the old Water-rat; “they really
deserve to be drowned.”

“Nothing of the kind,” answered the Duck, “every one must make a
beginning, and parents cannot be too patient.”

“Ah! I know nothing about the feelings of parents,” said the Water-rat;
“I am not a family man.  In fact, I have never been married, and I never
intend to be.  Love is all very well in its way, but friendship is much
higher.  Indeed, I know of nothing in the world that is either nobler or
rarer than a devoted friendship.”

“And what, pray, is your idea of the duties of a devoted friend?” asked a
Green Linnet, who was sitting in a willow-tree hard by, and had overheard
the conversation.

“Yes, that is just what I want to know,” said the Duck; and she swam away
to the end of the pond, and stood upon her head, in order to give her
children a good example.

“What a silly question!” cried the Water-rat.  “I should expect my
devoted friend to be devoted to me, of course.”

“And what would you do in return?” said the little bird, swinging upon a
silver spray, and flapping his tiny wings.

“I don’t understand you,” answered the Water-rat.

“Let me tell you a story on the subject,” said the Linnet.

“Is the story about me?” asked the Water-rat.  “If so, I will listen to
it, for I am extremely fond of fiction.”

“It is applicable to you,” answered the Linnet; and he flew down, and
alighting upon the bank, he told the story of The Devoted Friend.

“Once upon a time,” said the Linnet, “there was an honest little fellow
named Hans.”

“Was he very distinguished?” asked the Water-rat.

“No,” answered the Linnet, “I don’t think he was distinguished at all,
except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured face.  He
lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he worked in his
garden.  In all the country-side there was no garden so lovely as his.
Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and Shepherds’-purses, and
Fair-maids of France.  There were damask Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac
Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets and white.  Columbine and Ladysmock,
Marjoram and Wild Basil, the Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil
and the Clove-Pink bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the
months went by, one flower taking another flower’s place, so that there
were always beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.

“Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend of all
was big Hugh the Miller.  Indeed, so devoted was the rich Miller to
little Hans, that he would never go by his garden without leaning over
the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of sweet herbs, or
filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it was the fruit season.

“‘Real friends should have everything in common,’ the Miller used to say,
and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of having a friend
with such noble ideas.

“Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich
Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a hundred
sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows, and a large
flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head about these
things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to listen to all the
wonderful things the Miller used to say about the unselfishness of true
friendship.

“So little Hans worked away in his garden.  During the spring, the
summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came, and
he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered a good
deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed without any supper
but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.  In the winter, also, he was
extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to see him then.

“‘There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the snow
lasts,’ the Miller used to say to his wife, ‘for when people are in
trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by visitors.  That
at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure I am right.  So I
shall wait till the spring comes, and then I shall pay him a visit, and
he will be able to give me a large basket of primroses and that will make
him so happy.’

“‘You are certainly very thoughtful about others,’ answered the Wife, as
she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood fire; ‘very
thoughtful indeed.  It is quite a treat to hear you talk about
friendship.  I am sure the clergyman himself could not say such beautiful
things as you do, though he does live in a three-storied house, and wear
a gold ring on his little finger.’

“‘But could we not ask little Hans up here?’ said the Miller’s youngest
son.  ‘If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my porridge, and
show him my white rabbits.’

“‘What a silly boy you are!’ cried the Miller; ‘I really don’t know what
is the use of sending you to school.  You seem not to learn anything.
Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire, and our good
supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get envious, and envy is
a most terrible thing, and would spoil anybody’s nature.  I certainly
will not allow Hans’ nature to be spoiled.  I am his best friend, and I
will always watch over him, and see that he is not led into any
temptations.  Besides, if Hans came here, he might ask me to let him have
some flour on credit, and that I could not do.  Flour is one thing, and
friendship is another, and they should not be confused.  Why, the words
are spelt differently, and mean quite different things.  Everybody can
see that.’

“‘How well you talk!’ said the Miller’s Wife, pouring herself out a large
glass of warm ale; ‘really I feel quite drowsy.  It is just like being in
church.’

“‘Lots of people act well,’ answered the Miller; ‘but very few people
talk well, which shows that talking is much the more difficult thing of
the two, and much the finer thing also’; and he looked sternly across the
table at his little son, who felt so ashamed of himself that he hung his
head down, and grew quite scarlet, and began to cry into his tea.
However, he was so young that you must excuse him.”

“Is that the end of the story?” asked the Water-rat.

“Certainly not,” answered the Linnet, “that is the beginning.”

“Then you are quite behind the age,” said the Water-rat.  “Every good
story-teller nowadays starts with the end, and then goes on to the
beginning, and concludes with the middle.  That is the new method.  I
heard all about it the other day from a critic who was walking round the
pond with a young man.  He spoke of the matter at great length, and I am
sure he must have been right, for he had blue spectacles and a bald head,
and whenever the young man made any remark, he always answered ‘Pooh!’
But pray go on with your story.  I like the Miller immensely.  I have all
kinds of beautiful sentiments myself, so there is a great sympathy
between us.”

“Well,” said the Linnet, hopping now on one leg and now on the other, “as
soon as the winter was over, and the primroses began to open their pale
yellow stars, the Miller said to his wife that he would go down and see
little Hans.

“‘Why, what a good heart you have!’ cried his Wife; ‘you are always
thinking of others.  And mind you take the big basket with you for the
flowers.’

“So the Miller tied the sails of the windmill together with a strong iron
chain, and went down the hill with the basket on his arm.

“‘Good morning, little Hans,’ said the Miller.

“‘Good morning,’ said Hans, leaning on his spade, and smiling from ear to
ear.

“‘And how have you been all the winter?’ said the Miller.

“‘Well, really,’ cried Hans, ‘it is very good of you to ask, very good
indeed.  I am afraid I had rather a hard time of it, but now the spring
has come, and I am quite happy, and all my flowers are doing well.’

“‘We often talked of you during the winter, Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘and
wondered how you were getting on.’

“‘That was kind of you,’ said Hans; ‘I was half afraid you had forgotten
me.’

“‘Hans, I am surprised at you,’ said the Miller; ‘friendship never
forgets.  That is the wonderful thing about it, but I am afraid you don’t
understand the poetry of life.  How lovely your primroses are looking,
by-the-bye!”

“‘They are certainly very lovely,’ said Hans, ‘and it is a most lucky
thing for me that I have so many.  I am going to bring them into the
market and sell them to the Burgomaster’s daughter, and buy back my
wheelbarrow with the money.’

“‘Buy back your wheelbarrow?  You don’t mean to say you have sold it?
What a very stupid thing to do!’

“‘Well, the fact is,’ said Hans, ‘that I was obliged to.  You see the
winter was a very bad time for me, and I really had no money at all to
buy bread with.  So I first sold the silver buttons off my Sunday coat,
and then I sold my silver chain, and then I sold my big pipe, and at last
I sold my wheelbarrow.  But I am going to buy them all back again now.’

“‘Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘I will give you my wheelbarrow.  It is not in
very good repair; indeed, one side is gone, and there is something wrong
with the wheel-spokes; but in spite of that I will give it to you.  I
know it is very generous of me, and a great many people would think me
extremely foolish for parting with it, but I am not like the rest of the
world.  I think that generosity is the essence of friendship, and,
besides, I have got a new wheelbarrow for myself.  Yes, you may set your
mind at ease, I will give you my wheelbarrow.’

“‘Well, really, that is generous of you,’ said little Hans, and his funny
round face glowed all over with pleasure.  ‘I can easily put it in
repair, as I have a plank of wood in the house.’

“‘A plank of wood!’ said the Miller; ‘why, that is just what I want for
the roof of my barn.  There is a very large hole in it, and the corn will
all get damp if I don’t stop it up.  How lucky you mentioned it!  It is
quite remarkable how one good action always breeds another.  I have given
you my wheelbarrow, and now you are going to give me your plank.  Of
course, the wheelbarrow is worth far more than the plank, but true,
friendship never notices things like that.  Pray get it at once, and I
will set to work at my barn this very day.’

“‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, and he ran into the shed and dragged the
plank out.

“‘It is not a very big plank,’ said the Miller, looking at it, ‘and I am
afraid that after I have mended my barn-roof there won’t be any left for
you to mend the wheelbarrow with; but, of course, that is not my fault.
And now, as I have given you my wheelbarrow, I am sure you would like to
give me some flowers in return.  Here is the basket, and mind you fill it
quite full.’

“‘Quite full?’ said little Hans, rather sorrowfully, for it was really a
very big basket, and he knew that if he filled it he would have no
flowers left for the market and he was very anxious to get his silver
buttons back.

“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘as I have given you my
wheelbarrow, I don’t think that it is much to ask you for a few flowers.
I may be wrong, but I should have thought that friendship, true
friendship, was quite free from selfishness of any kind.’

“‘My dear friend, my best friend,’ cried little Hans, ‘you are welcome to
all the flowers in my garden.  I would much sooner have your good opinion
than my silver buttons, any day’; and he ran and plucked all his pretty
primroses, and filled the Miller’s basket.

“‘Good-bye, little Hans,’ said the Miller, as he went up the hill with
the plank on his shoulder, and the big basket in his hand.

“‘Good-bye,’ said little Hans, and he began to dig away quite merrily, he
was so pleased about the wheelbarrow.

“The next day he was nailing up some honeysuckle against the porch, when
he heard the Miller’s voice calling to him from the road.  So he jumped
off the ladder, and ran down the garden, and looked over the wall.

“There was the Miller with a large sack of flour on his back.

“‘Dear little Hans,’ said the Miller, ‘would you mind carrying this sack
of flour for me to market?’

“‘Oh, I am so sorry,’ said Hans, ‘but I am really very busy to-day.  I
have got all my creepers to nail up, and all my flowers to water, and all
my grass to roll.’

“‘Well, really,’ said the Miller, ‘I think that, considering that I am
going to give you my wheelbarrow, it is rather unfriendly of you to
refuse.’

“‘Oh, don’t say that,’ cried little Hans, ‘I wouldn’t be unfriendly for
the whole world’; and he ran in for his cap, and trudged off with the big
sack on his shoulders.

“It was a very hot day, and the road was terribly dusty, and before Hans
had reached the sixth milestone he was so tired that he had to sit down
and rest.  However, he went on bravely, and as last he reached the
market.  After he had waited there some time, he sold the sack of flour
for a very good price, and then he returned home at once, for he was
afraid that if he stopped too late he might meet some robbers on the way.

“‘It has certainly been a hard day,’ said little Hans to himself as he
was going to bed, ‘but I am glad I did not refuse the Miller, for he is
my best friend, and, besides, he is going to give me his wheelbarrow.’

“Early the next morning the Miller came down to get the money for his
sack of flour, but little Hans was so tired that he was still in bed.

“‘Upon my word,’ said the Miller, ‘you are very lazy.  Really,
considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, I think you might
work harder.  Idleness is a great sin, and I certainly don’t like any of
my friends to be idle or sluggish.  You must not mind my speaking quite
plainly to you.  Of course I should not dream of doing so if I were not
your friend.  But what is the good of friendship if one cannot say
exactly what one means?  Anybody can say charming things and try to
please and to flatter, but a true friend always says unpleasant things,
and does not mind giving pain.  Indeed, if he is a really true friend he
prefers it, for he knows that then he is doing good.’

“‘I am very sorry,’ said little Hans, rubbing his eyes and pulling off
his night-cap, ‘but I was so tired that I thought I would lie in bed for
a little time, and listen to the birds singing.  Do you know that I
always work better after hearing the birds sing?’

“‘Well, I am glad of that,’ said the Miller, clapping little Hans on the
back, ‘for I want you to come up to the mill as soon as you are dressed,
and mend my barn-roof for me.’

“Poor little Hans was very anxious to go and work in his garden, for his
flowers had not been watered for two days, but he did not like to refuse
the Miller, as he was such a good friend to him.

“‘Do you think it would be unfriendly of me if I said I was busy?’ he
inquired in a shy and timid voice.

“‘Well, really,’ answered the Miller, ‘I do not think it is much to ask
of you, considering that I am going to give you my wheelbarrow; but of
course if you refuse I will go and do it myself.’

“‘Oh! on no account,’ cried little Hans and he jumped out of bed, and
dressed himself, and went up to the barn.

“He worked there all day long, till sunset, and at sunset the Miller came
to see how he was getting on.

“‘Have you mended the hole in the roof yet, little Hans?’ cried the
Miller in a cheery voice.

“‘It is quite mended,’ answered little Hans, coming down the ladder.

“‘Ah!’ said the Miller, ‘there is no work so delightful as the work one
does for others.’

“‘It is certainly a great privilege to hear you talk,’ answered little
Hans, sitting down, and wiping his forehead, ‘a very great privilege.
But I am afraid I shall never have such beautiful ideas as you have.’

“‘Oh! they will come to you,’ said the Miller, ‘but you must take more
pains.  At present you have only the practice of friendship; some day you
will have the theory also.’

“‘Do you really think I shall?’ asked little Hans.

“‘I have no doubt of it,’ answered the Miller, ‘but now that you have
mended the roof, you had better go home and rest, for I want you to drive
my sheep to the mountain to-morrow.’

“Poor little Hans was afraid to say anything to this, and early the next
morning the Miller brought his sheep round to the cottage, and Hans
started off with them to the mountain.  It took him the whole day to get
there and back; and when he returned he was so tired that he went off to
sleep in his chair, and did not wake up till it was broad daylight.

“‘What a delightful time I shall have in my garden,’ he said, and he went
to work at once.

“But somehow he was never able to look after his flowers at all, for his
friend the Miller was always coming round and sending him off on long
errands, or getting him to help at the mill.  Little Hans was very much
distressed at times, as he was afraid his flowers would think he had
forgotten them, but he consoled himself by the reflection that the Miller
was his best friend.  ‘Besides,’ he used to say, ‘he is going to give me
his wheelbarrow, and that is an act of pure generosity.’

“So little Hans worked away for the Miller, and the Miller said all kinds
of beautiful things about friendship, which Hans took down in a
note-book, and used to read over at night, for he was a very good
scholar.

“Now it happened that one evening little Hans was sitting by his fireside
when a loud rap came at the door.  It was a very wild night, and the wind
was blowing and roaring round the house so terribly that at first he
thought it was merely the storm.  But a second rap came, and then a
third, louder than any of the others.

“‘It is some poor traveller,’ said little Hans to himself, and he ran to
the door.

“There stood the Miller with a lantern in one hand and a big stick in the
other.

“‘Dear little Hans,’ cried the Miller, ‘I am in great trouble.  My little
boy has fallen off a ladder and hurt himself, and I am going for the
Doctor.  But he lives so far away, and it is such a bad night, that it
has just occurred to me that it would be much better if you went instead
of me.  You know I am going to give you my wheelbarrow, and so, it is
only fair that you should do something for me in return.’

“‘Certainly,’ cried little Hans, ‘I take it quite as a compliment your
coming to me, and I will start off at once.  But you must lend me your
lantern, as the night is so dark that I am afraid I might fall into the
ditch.’

“‘I am very sorry,’ answered the Miller, ‘but it is my new lantern, and
it would be a great loss to me if anything happened to it.’

“‘Well, never mind, I will do without it,’ cried little Hans, and he took
down his great fur coat, and his warm scarlet cap, and tied a muffler
round his throat, and started off.

“What a dreadful storm it was!  The night was so black that little Hans
could hardly see, and the wind was so strong that he could scarcely
stand.  However, he was very courageous, and after he had been walking
about three hours, he arrived at the Doctor’s house, and knocked at the
door.

“‘Who is there?’ cried the Doctor, putting his head out of his bedroom
window.

“‘Little Hans, Doctor.’

“’What do you want, little Hans?’

“‘The Miller’s son has fallen from a ladder, and has hurt himself, and
the Miller wants you to come at once.’

“‘All right!’ said the Doctor; and he ordered his horse, and his big
boots, and his lantern, and came downstairs, and rode off in the
direction of the Miller’s house, little Hans trudging behind him.

“But the storm grew worse and worse, and the rain fell in torrents, and
little Hans could not see where he was going, or keep up with the horse.
At last he lost his way, and wandered off on the moor, which was a very
dangerous place, as it was full of deep holes, and there poor little Hans
was drowned.  His body was found the next day by some goatherds, floating
in a great pool of water, and was brought back by them to the cottage.

“Everybody went to little Hans’ funeral, as he was so popular, and the
Miller was the chief mourner.

“‘As I was his best friend,’ said the Miller, ‘it is only fair that I
should have the best place’; so he walked at the head of the procession
in a long black cloak, and every now and then he wiped his eyes with a
big pocket-handkerchief.

“‘Little Hans is certainly a great loss to every one,’ said the
Blacksmith, when the funeral was over, and they were all seated
comfortably in the inn, drinking spiced wine and eating sweet cakes.

“‘A great loss to me at any rate,’ answered the Miller; ‘why, I had as
good as given him my wheelbarrow, and now I really don’t know what to do
with it.  It is very much in my way at home, and it is in such bad repair
that I could not get anything for it if I sold it.  I will certainly take
care not to give away anything again.  One always suffers for being
generous.’”

“Well?” said the Water-rat, after a long pause.

“Well, that is the end,” said the Linnet.

“But what became of the Miller?” asked the Water-rat.

“Oh!  I really don’t know,” replied the Linnet; “and I am sure that I
don’t care.”

“It is quite evident then that you have no sympathy in your nature,” said
the Water-rat.

“I am afraid you don’t quite see the moral of the story,” remarked the
Linnet.

“The what?” screamed the Water-rat.

“The moral.”

“Do you mean to say that the story has a moral?”

“Certainly,” said the Linnet.

“Well, really,” said the Water-rat, in a very angry manner, “I think you
should have told me that before you began.  If you had done so, I
certainly would not have listened to you; in fact, I should have said
‘Pooh,’ like the critic.  However, I can say it now”; so he shouted out
“Pooh” at the top of his voice, gave a whisk with his tail, and went back
into his hole.

“And how do you like the Water-rat?” asked the Duck, who came paddling up
some minutes afterwards.  “He has a great many good points, but for my
own part I have a mother’s feelings, and I can never look at a confirmed
bachelor without the tears coming into my eyes.”

“I am rather afraid that I have annoyed him,” answered the Linnet.  “The
fact is, that I told him a story with a moral.”

“Ah! that is always a very dangerous thing to do,” said the Duck.

And I quite agree with her.

     




The Remarkable Rocket.


                     

THE King’s son was going to be married, so there were general rejoicings.
He had waited a whole year for his bride, and at last she had arrived.
She was a Russian Princess, and had driven all the way from Finland in a
sledge drawn by six reindeer.  The sledge was shaped like a great golden
swan, and between the swan’s wings lay the little Princess herself.  Her
long ermine-cloak reached right down to her feet, on her head was a tiny
cap of silver tissue, and she was as pale as the Snow Palace in which she
had always lived.  So pale was she that as she drove through the streets
all the people wondered.  “She is like a white rose!” they cried, and
they threw down flowers on her from the balconies.

  

At the gate of the Castle the Prince was waiting to receive her.  He had
dreamy violet eyes, and his hair was like fine gold.  When he saw her he
sank upon one knee, and kissed her hand.

“Your picture was beautiful,” he murmured, “but you are more beautiful
than your picture”; and the little Princess blushed.

“She was like a white rose before,” said a young Page to his neighbour,
“but she is like a red rose now”; and the whole Court was delighted.

For the next three days everybody went about saying, “White rose, Red
rose, Red rose, White rose”; and the King gave orders that the Page’s
salary was to be doubled.  As he received no salary at all this was not
of much use to him, but it was considered a great honour, and was duly
published in the Court Gazette.

When the three days were over the marriage was celebrated.  It was a
magnificent ceremony, and the bride and bridegroom walked hand in hand
under a canopy of purple velvet embroidered with little pearls.  Then
there was a State Banquet, which lasted for five hours.  The Prince and
Princess sat at the top of the Great Hall and drank out of a cup of clear
crystal.  Only true lovers could drink out of this cup, for if false lips
touched it, it grew grey and dull and cloudy.

“It’s quite clear that they love each other,” said the little Page, “as
clear as crystal!” and the King doubled his salary a second time.  “What
an honour!” cried all the courtiers.

After the banquet there was to be a Ball.  The bride and bridegroom were
to dance the Rose-dance together, and the King had promised to play the
flute.  He played very badly, but no one had ever dared to tell him so,
because he was the King.  Indeed, he knew only two airs, and was never
quite certain which one he was playing; but it made no matter, for,
whatever he did, everybody cried out, “Charming! charming!”

The last item on the programme was a grand display of fireworks, to be
let off exactly at midnight.  The little Princess had never seen a
firework in her life, so the King had given orders that the Royal
Pyrotechnist should be in attendance on the day of her marriage.

“What are fireworks like?” she had asked the Prince, one morning, as she
was walking on the terrace.

“They are like the Aurora Borealis,” said the King, who always answered
questions that were addressed to other people, “only much more natural.
I prefer them to stars myself, as you always know when they are going to
appear, and they are as delightful as my own flute-playing.  You must
certainly see them.”

So at the end of the King’s garden a great stand had been set up, and as
soon as the Royal Pyrotechnist had put everything in its proper place,
the fireworks began to talk to each other.

“The world is certainly very beautiful,” cried a little Squib.  “Just
look at those yellow tulips.  Why! if they were real crackers they could
not be lovelier.  I am very glad I have travelled.  Travel improves the
mind wonderfully, and does away with all one’s prejudices.”

“The King’s garden is not the world, you foolish squib,” said a big Roman
Candle; “the world is an enormous place, and it would take you three days
to see it thoroughly.”

“Any place you love is the world to you,” exclaimed a pensive Catherine
Wheel, who had been attached to an old deal box in early life, and prided
herself on her broken heart; “but love is not fashionable any more, the
poets have killed it.  They wrote so much about it that nobody believed
them, and I am not surprised.  True love suffers, and is silent.  I
remember myself once—But it is no matter now.  Romance is a thing of the
past.”

“Nonsense!” said the Roman Candle, “Romance never dies.  It is like the
moon, and lives for ever.  The bride and bridegroom, for instance, love
each other very dearly.  I heard all about them this morning from a
brown-paper cartridge, who happened to be staying in the same drawer as
myself, and knew the latest Court news.”

But the Catherine Wheel shook her head.  “Romance is dead, Romance is
dead, Romance is dead,” she murmured.  She was one of those people who
think that, if you say the same thing over and over a great many times,
it becomes true in the end.

Suddenly, a sharp, dry cough was heard, and they all looked round.

It came from a tall, supercilious-looking Rocket, who was tied to the end
of a long stick.  He always coughed before he made any observation, so as
to attract attention.

“Ahem! ahem!” he said, and everybody listened except the poor Catherine
Wheel, who was still shaking her head, and murmuring, “Romance is dead.”

“Order! order!” cried out a Cracker.  He was something of a politician,
and had always taken a prominent part in the local elections, so he knew
the proper Parliamentary expressions to use.

“Quite dead,” whispered the Catherine Wheel, and she went off to sleep.

As soon as there was perfect silence, the Rocket coughed a third time and
began.  He spoke with a very slow, distinct voice, as if he was dictating
his memoirs, and always looked over the shoulder of the person to whom he
was talking.  In fact, he had a most distinguished manner.

“How fortunate it is for the King’s son,” he remarked, “that he is to be
married on the very day on which I am to be let off.  Really, if it had
been arranged beforehand, it could not have turned out better for him;
but, Princes are always lucky.”

“Dear me!” said the little Squib, “I thought it was quite the other way,
and that we were to be let off in the Prince’s honour.”

“It may be so with you,” he answered; “indeed, I have no doubt that it
is, but with me it is different.  I am a very remarkable Rocket, and come
of remarkable parents.  My mother was the most celebrated Catherine Wheel
of her day, and was renowned for her graceful dancing.  When she made her
great public appearance she spun round nineteen times before she went
out, and each time that she did so she threw into the air seven pink
stars.  She was three feet and a half in diameter, and made of the very
best gunpowder.  My father was a Rocket like myself, and of French
extraction.  He flew so high that the people were afraid that he would
never come down again.  He did, though, for he was of a kindly
disposition, and he made a most brilliant descent in a shower of golden
rain.  The newspapers wrote about his performance in very flattering
terms.  Indeed, the Court Gazette called him a triumph of Pylotechnic
art.”

“Pyrotechnic, Pyrotechnic, you mean,” said a Bengal Light; “I know it is
Pyrotechnic, for I saw it written on my own canister.”

“Well, I said Pylotechnic,” answered the Rocket, in a severe tone of
voice, and the Bengal Light felt so crushed that he began at once to
bully the little squibs, in order to show that he was still a person of
some importance.

“I was saying,” continued the Rocket, “I was saying—What was I saying?”

“You were talking about yourself,” replied the Roman Candle.

“Of course; I knew I was discussing some interesting subject when I was
so rudely interrupted.  I hate rudeness and bad manners of every kind,
for I am extremely sensitive.  No one in the whole world is so sensitive
as I am, I am quite sure of that.”

“What is a sensitive person?” said the Cracker to the Roman Candle.

“A person who, because he has corns himself, always treads on other
people’s toes,” answered the Roman Candle in a low whisper; and the
Cracker nearly exploded with laughter.

“Pray, what are you laughing at?” inquired the Rocket; “I am not
laughing.”

“I am laughing because I am happy,” replied the Cracker.

“That is a very selfish reason,” said the Rocket angrily.  “What right
have you to be happy?  You should be thinking about others.  In fact, you
should be thinking about me.  I am always thinking about myself, and I
expect everybody else to do the same.  That is what is called sympathy.
It is a beautiful virtue, and I possess it in a high degree.  Suppose,
for instance, anything happened to me to-night, what a misfortune that
would be for every one!  The Prince and Princess would never be happy
again, their whole married life would be spoiled; and as for the King, I
know he would not get over it.  Really, when I begin to reflect on the
importance of my position, I am almost moved to tears.”

“If you want to give pleasure to others,” cried the Roman Candle, “you
had better keep yourself dry.”

“Certainly,” exclaimed the Bengal Light, who was now in better spirits;
“that is only common sense.”

“Common sense, indeed!” said the Rocket indignantly; “you forget that I
am very uncommon, and very remarkable.  Why, anybody can have common
sense, provided that they have no imagination.  But I have imagination,
for I never think of things as they really are; I always think of them as
being quite different.  As for keeping myself dry, there is evidently no
one here who can at all appreciate an emotional nature.  Fortunately for
myself, I don’t care.  The only thing that sustains one through life is
the consciousness of the immense inferiority of everybody else, and this
is a feeling that I have always cultivated.  But none of you have any
hearts.  Here you are laughing and making merry just as if the Prince and
Princess had not just been married.”

“Well, really,” exclaimed a small Fire-balloon, “why not?  It is a most
joyful occasion, and when I soar up into the air I intend to tell the
stars all about it.  You will see them twinkle when I talk to them about
the pretty bride.”

“Ah! what a trivial view of life!” said the Rocket; “but it is only what
I expected.  There is nothing in you; you are hollow and empty.  Why,
perhaps the Prince and Princess may go to live in a country where there
is a deep river, and perhaps they may have one only son, a little
fair-haired boy with violet eyes like the Prince himself; and perhaps
some day he may go out to walk with his nurse; and perhaps the nurse may
go to sleep under a great elder-tree; and perhaps the little boy may fall
into the deep river and be drowned.  What a terrible misfortune!  Poor
people, to lose their only son!  It is really too dreadful!  I shall
never get over it.”

“But they have not lost their only son,” said the Roman Candle; “no
misfortune has happened to them at all.”

“I never said that they had,” replied the Rocket; “I said that they
might.  If they had lost their only son there would be no use in saying
anything more about the matter.  I hate people who cry over spilt milk.
But when I think that they might lose their only son, I certainly am very
much affected.”

“You certainly are!” cried the Bengal Light.  “In fact, you are the most
affected person I ever met.”

“You are the rudest person I ever met,” said the Rocket, “and you cannot
understand my friendship for the Prince.”

“Why, you don’t even know him,” growled the Roman Candle.

“I never said I knew him,” answered the Rocket.  “I dare say that if I
knew him I should not be his friend at all.  It is a very dangerous thing
to know one’s friends.”

“You had really better keep yourself dry,” said the Fire-balloon.  “That
is the important thing.”

“Very important for you, I have no doubt,” answered the Rocket, “but I
shall weep if I choose”; and he actually burst into real tears, which
flowed down his stick like rain-drops, and nearly drowned two little
beetles, who were just thinking of setting up house together, and were
looking for a nice dry spot to live in.

“He must have a truly romantic nature,” said the Catherine Wheel, “for he
weeps when there is nothing at all to weep about”; and she heaved a deep
sigh, and thought about the deal box.

But the Roman Candle and the Bengal Light were quite indignant, and kept
saying, “Humbug! humbug!” at the top of their voices.  They were
extremely practical, and whenever they objected to anything they called
it humbug.

Then the moon rose like a wonderful silver shield; and the stars began to
shine, and a sound of music came from the palace.

The Prince and Princess were leading the dance.  They danced so
beautifully that the tall white lilies peeped in at the window and
watched them, and the great red poppies nodded their heads and beat time.

Then ten o’clock struck, and then eleven, and then twelve, and at the
last stroke of midnight every one came out on the terrace, and the King
sent for the Royal Pyrotechnist.

“Let the fireworks begin,” said the King; and the Royal Pyrotechnist made
a low bow, and marched down to the end of the garden.  He had six
attendants with him, each of whom carried a lighted torch at the end of a
long pole.

It was certainly a magnificent display.

Whizz! Whizz! went the Catherine Wheel, as she spun round and round.
Boom!  Boom! went the Roman Candle.  Then the Squibs danced all over the
place, and the Bengal Lights made everything look scarlet.  “Good-bye,”
cried the Fire-balloon, as he soared away, dropping tiny blue sparks.
Bang! Bang! answered the Crackers, who were enjoying themselves
immensely.  Every one was a great success except the Remarkable Rocket.
He was so damp with crying that he could not go off at all.  The best
thing in him was the gunpowder, and that was so wet with tears that it
was of no use.  All his poor relations, to whom he would never speak,
except with a sneer, shot up into the sky like wonderful golden flowers
with blossoms of fire.  Huzza! Huzza! cried the Court; and the little
Princess laughed with pleasure.

“I suppose they are reserving me for some grand occasion,” said the
Rocket; “no doubt that is what it means,” and he looked more supercilious
than ever.

The next day the workmen came to put everything tidy.  “This is evidently
a deputation,” said the Rocket; “I will receive them with becoming
dignity” so he put his nose in the air, and began to frown severely as if
he were thinking about some very important subject.  But they took no
notice of him at all till they were just going away.  Then one of them
caught sight of him.  “Hallo!” he cried, “what a bad rocket!” and he
threw him over the wall into the ditch.

“BAD Rocket?  BAD Rocket?” he said, as he whirled through the air;
“impossible!  GRAND Rocket, that is what the man said.  BAD and GRAND
sound very much the same, indeed they often are the same”; and he fell
into the mud.

“It is not comfortable here,” he remarked, “but no doubt it is some
fashionable watering-place, and they have sent me away to recruit my
health.  My nerves are certainly very much shattered, and I require
rest.”

Then a little Frog, with bright jewelled eyes, and a green mottled coat,
swam up to him.

“A new arrival, I see!” said the Frog.  “Well, after all there is nothing
like mud.  Give me rainy weather and a ditch, and I am quite happy.  Do
you think it will be a wet afternoon?  I am sure I hope so, but the sky
is quite blue and cloudless.  What a pity!”

“Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket, and he began to cough.

“What a delightful voice you have!” cried the Frog.  “Really it is quite
like a croak, and croaking is of course the most musical sound in the
world.  You will hear our glee-club this evening.  We sit in the old duck
pond close by the farmer’s house, and as soon as the moon rises we begin.
It is so entrancing that everybody lies awake to listen to us.  In fact,
it was only yesterday that I heard the farmer’s wife say to her mother
that she could not get a wink of sleep at night on account of us.  It is
most gratifying to find oneself so popular.”

“Ahem! ahem!” said the Rocket angrily.  He was very much annoyed that he
could not get a word in.

“A delightful voice, certainly,” continued the Frog; “I hope you will
come over to the duck-pond.  I am off to look for my daughters.  I have
six beautiful daughters, and I am so afraid the Pike may meet them.  He
is a perfect monster, and would have no hesitation in breakfasting off
them.  Well, good-bye: I have enjoyed our conversation very much, I
assure you.”

“Conversation, indeed!” said the Rocket.  “You have talked the whole time
yourself.  That is not conversation.”

“Somebody must listen,” answered the Frog, “and I like to do all the
talking myself.  It saves time, and prevents arguments.”

“But I like arguments,” said the Rocket.

“I hope not,” said the Frog complacently.  “Arguments are extremely
vulgar, for everybody in good society holds exactly the same opinions.
Good-bye a second time; I see my daughters in the distance and the little
Frog swam away.

“You are a very irritating person,” said the Rocket, “and very ill-bred.
I hate people who talk about themselves, as you do, when one wants to
talk about oneself, as I do.  It is what I call selfishness, and
selfishness is a most detestable thing, especially to any one of my
temperament, for I am well known for my sympathetic nature.  In fact, you
should take example by me; you could not possibly have a better model.
Now that you have the chance you had better avail yourself of it, for I
am going back to Court almost immediately.  I am a great favourite at
Court; in fact, the Prince and Princess were married yesterday in my
honour.  Of course you know nothing of these matters, for you are a
provincial.”

“There is no good talking to him,” said a Dragon-fly, who was sitting on
the top of a large brown bulrush; “no good at all, for he has gone away.”

“Well, that is his loss, not mine,” answered the Rocket.  “I am not going
to stop talking to him merely because he pays no attention.  I like
hearing myself talk.  It is one of my greatest pleasures.  I often have
long conversations all by myself, and I am so clever that sometimes I
don’t understand a single word of what I am saying.”

“Then you should certainly lecture on Philosophy,” said the Dragon-fly;
and he spread a pair of lovely gauze wings and soared away into the sky.

“How very silly of him not to stay here!” said the Rocket.  “I am sure
that he has not often got such a chance of improving his mind.  However,
I don’t care a bit.  Genius like mine is sure to be appreciated some
day”; and he sank down a little deeper into the mud.

After some time a large White Duck swam up to him.  She had yellow legs,
and webbed feet, and was considered a great beauty on account of her
waddle.

“Quack, quack, quack,” she said.  “What a curious shape you are!  May I
ask were you born like that, or is it the result of an accident?”

“It is quite evident that you have always lived in the country,” answered
the Rocket, “otherwise you would know who I am.  However, I excuse your
ignorance.  It would be unfair to expect other people to be as remarkable
as oneself.  You will no doubt be surprised to hear that I can fly up
into the sky, and come down in a shower of golden rain.”

“I don’t think much of that,” said the Duck, “as I cannot see what use it
is to any one.  Now, if you could plough the fields like the ox, or draw
a cart like the horse, or look after the sheep like the collie-dog, that
would be something.”

“My good creature,” cried the Rocket in a very haughty tone of voice, “I
see that you belong to the lower orders.  A person of my position is
never useful.  We have certain accomplishments, and that is more than
sufficient.  I have no sympathy myself with industry of any kind, least
of all with such industries as you seem to recommend.  Indeed, I have
always been of opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who
have nothing whatever to do.”

“Well, well,” said the Duck, who was of a very peaceable disposition, and
never quarrelled with any one, “everybody has different tastes.  I hope,
at any rate, that you are going to take up your residence here.”

“Oh! dear no,” cried the Rocket.  “I am merely a visitor, a distinguished
visitor.  The fact is that I find this place rather tedious.  There is
neither society here, nor solitude.  In fact, it is essentially suburban.
I shall probably go back to Court, for I know that I am destined to make
a sensation in the world.”

“I had thoughts of entering public life once myself,” remarked the Duck;
“there are so many things that need reforming.  Indeed, I took the chair
at a meeting some time ago, and we passed resolutions condemning
everything that we did not like.  However, they did not seem to have much
effect.  Now I go in for domesticity, and look after my family.”

“I am made for public life,” said the Rocket, “and so are all my
relations, even the humblest of them.  Whenever we appear we excite great
attention.  I have not actually appeared myself, but when I do so it will
be a magnificent sight.  As for domesticity, it ages one rapidly, and
distracts one’s mind from higher things.”

“Ah! the higher things of life, how fine they are!” said the Duck; “and
that reminds me how hungry I feel”: and she swam away down the stream,
saying, “Quack, quack, quack.”

“Come back! come back!” screamed the Rocket, “I have a great deal to say
to you”; but the Duck paid no attention to him.  “I am glad that she has
gone,” he said to himself, “she has a decidedly middle-class mind”; and
he sank a little deeper still into the mud, and began to think about the
loneliness of genius, when suddenly two little boys in white smocks came
running down the bank, with a kettle and some faggots.

“This must be the deputation,” said the Rocket, and he tried to look very
dignified.

“Hallo!” cried one of the boys, “look at this old stick!  I wonder how it
came here”; and he picked the rocket out of the ditch.

“OLD Stick!” said the Rocket, “impossible!  GOLD Stick, that is what he
said.  Gold Stick is very complimentary.  In fact, he mistakes me for one
of the Court dignitaries!”

“Let us put it into the fire!” said the other boy, “it will help to boil
the kettle.”

So they piled the faggots together, and put the Rocket on top, and lit
the fire.

“This is magnificent,” cried the Rocket, “they are going to let me off in
broad day-light, so that every one can see me.”

“We will go to sleep now,” they said, “and when we wake up the kettle
will be boiled”; and they lay down on the grass, and shut their eyes.

The Rocket was very damp, so he took a long time to burn.  At last,
however, the fire caught him.

“Now I am going off!” he cried, and he made himself very stiff and
straight.  “I know I shall go much higher than the stars, much higher
than the moon, much higher than the sun.  In fact, I shall go so high
that—”

Fizz! Fizz! Fizz! and he went straight up into the air.

“Delightful!” he cried, “I shall go on like this for ever.  What a
success I am!”

But nobody saw him.

Then he began to feel a curious tingling sensation all over him.

“Now I am going to explode,” he cried.  “I shall set the whole world on
fire, and make such a noise that nobody will talk about anything else for
a whole year.”  And he certainly did explode.  Bang! Bang! Bang! went the
gunpowder.  There was no doubt about it.

But nobody heard him, not even the two little boys, for they were sound
asleep.

Then all that was left of him was the stick, and this fell down on the
back of a Goose who was taking a walk by the side of the ditch.

“Good heavens!” cried the Goose.  “It is going to rain sticks”; and she
rushed into the water.

“I knew I should create a great sensation,” gasped the Rocket, and he
went out.

FIRST ACT


SCENE


_The octagon room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house in Grosvenor Square_.

[_The room is brilliantly lighted and full of guests_.  _At the top of
the staircase stands_ LADY CHILTERN, _a woman of grave Greek beauty_,
_about twenty-seven years of age_.  _She receives the guests as they come
up_.  _Over the well of the staircase hangs a great chandelier with wax
lights_, _which illumine a large eighteenth-century French
tapestry—representing the Triumph of Love_, _from a design by
Boucher—that is stretched on the staircase wall_.  _On the right is the
entrance to the music-room_.  _The sound of a string quartette is faintly
heard_.  _The entrance on the left leads to other reception-rooms_.  MRS.
MARCHMONT _and_ LADY BASILDON, _two very pretty women_, _are seated
together on a Louis Seize sofa_.  _They are types of exquisite
fragility_.  _Their affectation of manner has a delicate charm_.
_Watteau would have loved to paint them_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Going on to the Hartlocks’ to-night, Margaret?

LADY BASILDON.  I suppose so.  Are you?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Yes.  Horribly tedious parties they give, don’t they?

LADY BASILDON.  Horribly tedious!  Never know why I go.  Never know why I
go anywhere.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I come here to be educated.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! I hate being educated!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  So do I.  It puts one almost on a level with the
commercial classes, doesn’t it?  But dear Gertrude Chiltern is always
telling me that I should have some serious purpose in life.  So I come
here to try to find one.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Looking round through her lorgnette_.]  I don’t see
anybody here to-night whom one could possibly call a serious purpose.
The man who took me in to dinner talked to me about his wife the whole
time.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  How very trivial of him!

LADY BASILDON.  Terribly trivial!  What did your man talk about?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  About myself.

LADY BASILDON.  [_Languidly_.]  And were you interested?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Not in the smallest degree.

LADY BASILDON.  What martyrs we are, dear Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Rising_.]  And how well it becomes us, Olivia!

[_They rise and go towards the music-room_.  _The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC, _a
young attaché known for his neckties and his Anglomania_, _approaches
with a low bow_, _and enters into conversation_.]

MASON.  [_Announcing guests from the top of the staircase_.]  Mr. and
Lady Jane Barford.  Lord Caversham.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM, _an old gentleman of seventy_, _wearing the
riband and star of the Garter_.  _A fine Whig type_.  _Rather like a
portrait by Lawrence_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Has my good-for-nothing
young son been here?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  I don’t think Lord Goring has arrived yet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Coming up to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  Why do you call Lord
Goring good-for-nothing?

[MABEL CHILTERN _is a perfect example of the English type of prettiness_,
_the apple-blossom type_.  _She has all the fragrance and freedom of a
flower_.  _There is ripple after ripple of sunlight in her hair_, _and
the little mouth_, _with its parted lips_, _is expectant_, _like the
mouth of a child_.  _She has the fascinating tyranny of youth_, _and the
astonishing courage of innocence_.  _To sane people she is not
reminiscent of any work of art_.  _But she is really like a Tanagra
statuette_, _and would be rather annoyed if she were told so_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Because he leads such an idle life.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How can you say such a thing?  Why, he rides in the Row
at ten o’clock in the morning, goes to the Opera three times a week,
changes his clothes at least five times a day, and dines out every night
of the season.  You don’t call that leading an idle life, do you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Looking at her with a kindly twinkle in his eyes_.]
You are a very charming young lady!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How sweet of you to say that, Lord Caversham!  Do come
to us more often.  You know we are always at home on Wednesdays, and you
look so well with your star!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Never go anywhere now.  Sick of London Society.
Shouldn’t mind being introduced to my own tailor; he always votes on the
right side.  But object strongly to being sent down to dinner with my
wife’s milliner.  Never could stand Lady Caversham’s bonnets.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I love London Society!  I think it has immensely
improved.  It is entirely composed now of beautiful idiots and brilliant
lunatics.  Just what Society should be.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  Which is Goring?  Beautiful idiot, or the other
thing?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I have been obliged for the present to put
Lord Goring into a class quite by himself.  But he is developing
charmingly!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Into what?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little curtsey_.]  I hope to let you know very
soon, Lord Caversham!

MASON.  [_Announcing guests_.]  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.  LADY MARKBY _is a pleasant_,
_kindly_, _popular woman_, _with gray hair à la marquise and good lace_.
MRS. CHEVELEY, _who accompanies her_, _is tall and rather slight_.  _Lips
very thin and highly-coloured_, _a line of scarlet on a pallid face_.
_Venetian red hair_, _aquiline nose_, _and long throat_.  _Rouge
accentuates the natural paleness of her complexion_.  _Gray-green eyes
that move restlessly_.  _She is in heliotrope_, _with diamonds_.  _She
looks rather like an orchid_, _and makes great demands on one’s
curiosity_.  _In all her movements she is extremely graceful_.  _A work
of art_, _on the whole_, _but showing the influence of too many
schools_.]

LADY MARKBY.  Good evening, dear Gertrude!  So kind of you to let me
bring my friend, Mrs. Cheveley.  Two such charming women should know each
other!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advances towards_ MRS. CHEVELEY _with a sweet smile_.
_Then suddenly stops_, _and bows rather distantly_.]  I think Mrs.
Cheveley and I have met before.  I did not know she had married a second
time.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially_.]  Ah, nowadays people marry as often as they
can, don’t they?  It is most fashionable.  [_To_ DUCHESS OF MARYBOROUGH.]
Dear Duchess, and how is the Duke?  Brain still weak, I suppose?  Well,
that is only to be expected, is it not?  His good father was just the
same.  There is nothing like race, is there?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Playing with her fan_.]  But have we really met before,
Lady Chiltern?  I can’t remember where.  I have been out of England for
so long.

LADY CHILTERN.  We were at school together, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Superciliously_.]  Indeed?  I have forgotten all about my
schooldays.  I have a vague impression that they were detestable.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  I am not surprised!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her sweetest manner_.]  Do you know, I am quite
looking forward to meeting your clever husband, Lady Chiltern.  Since he
has been at the Foreign Office, he has been so much talked of in Vienna.
They actually succeed in spelling his name right in the newspapers.  That
in itself is fame, on the continent.

LADY CHILTERN.  I hardly think there will be much in common between you
and my husband, Mrs. Cheveley!  [_Moves away_.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! chère Madame, queue surprise!  I have not seen
you since Berlin!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Not since Berlin, Vicomte.  Five years ago!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  And you are younger and more beautiful than ever.
How do you manage it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  By making it a rule only to talk to perfectly charming
people like yourself.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Ah! you flatter me.  You butter me, as they say here.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do they say that here?  How dreadful of them!

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  Yes, they have a wonderful language.  It should be
more widely known.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters_.  _A man of forty_, _but looking somewhat
younger_.  _Clean-shaven_, _with finely-cut features_, _dark-haired and
dark-eyed_.  _A personality of mark_.  _Not popular—few personalities
are_.  _But intensely admired by the few_, _and deeply respected by the
many_.  _The note of his manner is that of perfect distinction_, _with a
slight touch of pride_.  _One feels that he is conscious of the success
he has made in life_.  _A nervous temperament_, _with a tired look_.
_The firmly-chiselled mouth and chin contrast strikingly with the
romantic expression in the deep-set eyes_.  _The variance is suggestive
of an almost complete separation of passion and intellect_, _as though
thought and emotion were each isolated in its own sphere through some
violence of will-power_.  _There is nervousness in the nostrils_, _and in
the pale_, _thin_, _pointed hands_.  _It would be inaccurate to call him
picturesque_.  _Picturesqueness cannot survive the House of Commons_.
_But Vandyck would have liked to have painted his head_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, Lady Markby!  I hope you have brought
Sir John with you?

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! I have brought a much more charming person than Sir
John.  Sir John’s temper since he has taken seriously to politics has
become quite unbearable.  Really, now that the House of Commons is trying
to become useful, it does a great deal of harm.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope not, Lady Markby.  At any rate we do our
best to waste the public time, don’t we?  But who is this charming person
you have been kind enough to bring to us?

LADY MARKBY.  Her name is Mrs. Cheveley!  One of the Dorsetshire
Cheveleys, I suppose.  But I really don’t know.  Families are so mixed
nowadays.  Indeed, as a rule, everybody turns out to be somebody else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley?  I seem to know the name.

LADY MARKBY.  She has just arrived from Vienna.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! yes.  I think I know whom you mean.

LADY MARKBY.  Oh! she goes everywhere there, and has such pleasant
scandals about all her friends.  I really must go to Vienna next winter.
I hope there is a good chef at the Embassy.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is not, the Ambassador will certainly have
to be recalled.  Pray point out Mrs. Cheveley to me.  I should like to
see her.

LADY MARKBY.  Let me introduce you.  [_To_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  My dear, Sir
Robert Chiltern is dying to know you!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bowing_.]  Every one is dying to know the
brilliant Mrs. Cheveley.  Our attachés at Vienna write to us about
nothing else.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you, Sir Robert.  An acquaintance that begins with
a compliment is sure to develop into a real friendship.  It starts in the
right manner.  And I find that I know Lady Chiltern already.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  She has just reminded me that we were at school
together.  I remember it perfectly now.  She always got the good conduct
prize.  I have a distinct recollection of Lady Chiltern always getting
the good conduct prize!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  And what prizes did you get, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My prizes came a little later on in life.  I don’t think
any of them were for good conduct.  I forget!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am sure they were for something charming!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t know that women are always rewarded for being
charming.  I think they are usually punished for it!  Certainly, more
women grow old nowadays through the faithfulness of their admirers than
through anything else!  At least that is the only way I can account for
the terribly haggard look of most of your pretty women in London!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What an appalling philosophy that sounds!  To
attempt to classify you, Mrs. Cheveley, would be an impertinence.  But
may I ask, at heart, are you an optimist or a pessimist?  Those seem to
be the only two fashionable religions left to us nowadays.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I’m neither.  Optimism begins in a broad grin, and
Pessimism ends with blue spectacles.  Besides, they are both of them
merely poses.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You prefer to be natural?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  But it is such a very difficult pose to keep
up.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What would those modern psychological novelists, of
whom we hear so much, say to such a theory as that?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Ah! the strength of women comes from the fact that
psychology cannot explain us.  Men can be analysed, women . . . merely
adored.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You think science cannot grapple with the problem
of women?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Science can never grapple with the irrational.  That is
why it has no future before it, in this world.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And women represent the irrational.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well-dressed women do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a polite bow_.]  I fear I could hardly agree
with you there.  But do sit down.  And now tell me, what makes you leave
your brilliant Vienna for our gloomy London—or perhaps the question is
indiscreet?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Questions are never indiscreet.  Answers sometimes are.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Well, at any rate, may I know if it is politics or
pleasure?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Politics are my only pleasure.  You see nowadays it is
not fashionable to flirt till one is forty, or to be romantic till one is
forty-five, so we poor women who are under thirty, or say we are, have
nothing open to us but politics or philanthropy.  And philanthropy seems
to me to have become simply the refuge of people who wish to annoy their
fellow-creatures.  I prefer politics.  I think they are more . . .
becoming!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  A political life is a noble career!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sometimes.  And sometimes it is a clever game, Sir
Robert.  And sometimes it is a great nuisance.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Which do you find it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I?  A combination of all three.  [_Drops her fan_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Picks up fan_.]  Allow me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But you have not told me yet what makes you honour
London so suddenly.  Our season is almost over.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! I don’t care about the London season!  It is too
matrimonial.  People are either hunting for husbands, or hiding from
them.  I wanted to meet you.  It is quite true.  You know what a woman’s
curiosity is.  Almost as great as a man’s!  I wanted immensely to meet
you, and . . . to ask you to do something for me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I hope it is not a little thing, Mrs. Cheveley.  I
find that little things are so very difficult to do.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a moment’s reflection_.]  No, I don’t think it is
quite a little thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad.  Do tell me what it is.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Later on.  [_Rises_.]  And now may I walk through your
beautiful house?  I hear your pictures are charming.  Poor Baron
Arnheim—you remember the Baron?—used to tell me you had some wonderful
Corots.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With an almost imperceptible start_.]  Did you
know Baron Arnheim well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  Intimately.  Did you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  At one time.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful man, wasn’t he?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  He was very remarkable, in many
ways.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I often think it such a pity he never wrote his memoirs.
They would have been most interesting.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes: he knew men and cities well, like the old
Greek.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Without the dreadful disadvantage of having a Penelope
waiting at home for him.

MASON.  Lord Goring.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING.  _Thirty-four_, _but always says he is younger_.
_A well-bred_, _expressionless face_.  _He is clever_, _but would not
like to be thought so_.  _A flawless dandy_, _he would be annoyed if he
were considered romantic_.  _He plays with life_, _and is on perfectly
good terms with the world_.  _He is fond of being misunderstood_.  _It
gives him a post of vantage_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Good evening, my dear Arthur!  Mrs. Cheveley, allow
me to introduce to you Lord Goring, the idlest man in London.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have met Lord Goring before.

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  I did not think you would remember me, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My memory is under admirable control.  And are you still
a bachelor?

LORD GORING.  I . . . believe so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very romantic!

LORD GORING.  Oh! I am not at all romantic.  I am not old enough.  I
leave romance to my seniors.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Lord Goring is the result of Boodle’s Club, Mrs.
Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  He reflects every credit on the institution.

LORD GORING.  May I ask are you staying in London long?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That depends partly on the weather, partly on the
cooking, and partly on Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are not going to plunge us into a European war,
I hope?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  There is no danger, at present!

[_She nods to_ LORD GORING, _with a look of amusement in her eyes_, _and
goes out with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  LORD GORING _saunters over to_ MABEL
CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are very late!

LORD GORING.  Have you missed me?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Awfully!

LORD GORING.  Then I am sorry I did not stay away longer.  I like being
missed.

MABEL CHILTERN.  How very selfish of you!

LORD GORING.  I am very selfish.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You are always telling me of your bad qualities, Lord
Goring.

LORD GORING.  I have only told you half of them as yet, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Are the others very bad?

LORD GORING.  Quite dreadful!  When I think of them at night I go to
sleep at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I delight in your bad qualities.  I wouldn’t have
you part with one of them.

LORD GORING.  How very nice of you!  But then you are always nice.  By
the way, I want to ask you a question, Miss Mabel.  Who brought Mrs.
Cheveley here?  That woman in heliotrope, who has just gone out of the
room with your brother?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh, I think Lady Markby brought her.  Why do you ask?

LORD GORING.  I haven’t seen her for years, that is all.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What an absurd reason!

LORD GORING.  All reasons are absurd.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What sort of a woman is she?

LORD GORING.  Oh! a genius in the daytime and a beauty at night!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I dislike her already.

LORD GORING.  That shows your admirable good taste.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  [_Approaching_.]  Ah, the English young lady is the
dragon of good taste, is she not?  Quite the dragon of good taste.

LORD GORING.  So the newspapers are always telling us.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I read all your English newspapers.  I find them so
amusing.

LORD GORING.  Then, my dear Nanjac, you must certainly read between the
lines.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I should like to, but my professor objects.  [_To_
MABEL CHILTERN.]  May I have the pleasure of escorting you to the
music-room, Mademoiselle?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking very disappointed_.]  Delighted, Vicomte,
quite delighted!  [_Turning to_ LORD GORING.]  Aren’t you coming to the
music-room?

LORD GORING.  Not if there is any music going on, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Severely_.]  The music is in German.  You would not
understand it.

[_Goes out with the_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  LORD CAVERSHAM _comes up to his
son_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir! what are you doing here?  Wasting your life
as usual!  You should be in bed, sir.  You keep too late hours!  I heard
of you the other night at Lady Rufford’s dancing till four o’clock in the
morning!

LORD GORING.  Only a quarter to four, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Can’t make out how you stand London Society.  The thing
has gone to the dogs, a lot of damned nobodies talking about nothing.

LORD GORING.  I love talking about nothing, father.  It is the only thing
I know anything about.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You seem to me to be living entirely for pleasure.

LORD GORING.  What else is there to live for, father?  Nothing ages like
happiness.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are heartless, sir, very heartless!

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.  Good evening, Lady Basildon!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Arching two pretty eyebrows_.]  Are you here?  I had no
idea you ever came to political parties!

LORD GORING.  I adore political parties.  They are the only place left to
us where people don’t talk politics.

LADY BASILDON.  I delight in talking politics.  I talk them all day long.
But I can’t bear listening to them.  I don’t know how the unfortunate men
in the House stand these long debates.

LORD GORING.  By never listening.

LADY BASILDON.  Really?

LORD GORING.  [_In his most serious manner_.]  Of course.  You see, it is
a very dangerous thing to listen.  If one listens one may be convinced;
and a man who allows himself to be convinced by an argument is a
thoroughly unreasonable person.

LADY BASILDON.  Ah! that accounts for so much in men that I have never
understood, and so much in women that their husbands never appreciate in
them!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_With a sigh_.]  Our husbands never appreciate anything
in us.  We have to go to others for that!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Emphatically_.]  Yes, always to others, have we not?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  And those are the views of the two ladies who
are known to have the most admirable husbands in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  That is exactly what we can’t stand.  My Reginald is
quite hopelessly faultless.  He is really unendurably so, at times!
There is not the smallest element of excitement in knowing him.

LORD GORING.  How terrible!  Really, the thing should be more widely
known!

LADY BASILDON.  Basildon is quite as bad; he is as domestic as if he was
a bachelor.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Pressing_ LADY BASILDON’S _hand_.]  My poor Olivia!
We have married perfect husbands, and we are well punished for it.

LORD GORING.  I should have thought it was the husbands who were
punished.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Drawing herself up_.]  Oh, dear no!  They are as happy
as possible!  And as for trusting us, it is tragic how much they trust
us.

LADY BASILDON.  Perfectly tragic!

LORD GORING.  Or comic, Lady Basildon?

LADY BASILDON.  Certainly not comic, Lord Goring.  How unkind of you to
suggest such a thing!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  I am afraid Lord Goring is in the camp of the enemy, as
usual.  I saw him talking to that Mrs. Cheveley when he came in.

LORD GORING.  Handsome woman, Mrs. Cheveley!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Stiffly_.]  Please don’t praise other women in our
presence.  You might wait for us to do that!

LORD GORING.  I did wait.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Well, we are not going to praise her.  I hear she went
to the Opera on Monday night, and told Tommy Rufford at supper that, as
far as she could see, London Society was entirely made up of dowdies and
dandies.

LORD GORING.  She is quite right, too.  The men are all dowdies and the
women are all dandies, aren’t they?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_After a pause_.]  Oh! do you really think that is what
Mrs. Cheveley meant?

LORD GORING.  Of course.  And a very sensible remark for Mrs. Cheveley to
make, too.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.  _She joins the group_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Why are you talking about Mrs. Cheveley?  Everybody is
talking about Mrs. Cheveley!  Lord Goring says—what did you say, Lord
Goring, about Mrs. Cheveley?  Oh! I remember, that she was a genius in
the daytime and a beauty at night.

LADY BASILDON.  What a horrid combination!  So very unnatural!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_In her most dreamy manner_.]  I like looking at
geniuses, and listening to beautiful people.

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is morbid of you, Mrs. Marchmont!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Brightening to a look of real pleasure_.]  I am so
glad to hear you say that.  Marchmont and I have been married for seven
years, and he has never once told me that I was morbid.  Men are so
painfully unobservant!

LADY BASILDON.  [_Turning to her_.]  I have always said, dear Margaret,
that you were the most morbid person in London.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Ah! but you are always sympathetic, Olivia!

MABEL CHILTERN.  Is it morbid to have a desire for food?  I have a great
desire for food.  Lord Goring, will you give me some supper?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure, Miss Mabel.  [_Moves away with her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  How horrid you have been!  You have never talked to me
the whole evening!

LORD GORING.  How could I?  You went away with the child-diplomatist.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You might have followed us.  Pursuit would have been
only polite.  I don’t think I like you at all this evening!

LORD GORING.  I like you immensely.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, I wish you’d show it in a more marked way!  [_They
go downstairs_.]

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Olivia, I have a curious feeling of absolute faintness.
I think I should like some supper very much.  I know I should like some
supper.

LADY BASILDON.  I am positively dying for supper, Margaret!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Men are so horribly selfish, they never think of these
things.

LADY BASILDON.  Men are grossly material, grossly material!

[_The_ VICOMTE DE NANJAC _enters from the music-room with some other
guests_.  _After having carefully examined all the people present_, _he
approaches_ LADY BASILDON.]

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  May I have the honour of taking you down to supper,
Comtesse?

LADY BASILDON.  [_Coldly_.]  I never take supper, thank you, Vicomte.
[_The_ VICOMTE _is about to retire_.  LADY BASILDON, _seeing this_,
_rises at once and takes his arm_.]  But I will come down with you with
pleasure.

VICOMTE DE NANJAC.  I am so fond of eating!  I am very English in all my
tastes.

LADY BASILDON.  You look quite English, Vicomte, quite English.

[_They pass out_.  MR. MONTFORD, _a perfectly groomed young dandy_,
_approaches_ MRS. MARCHMONT.]

MR. MONTFORD.  Like some supper, Mrs. Marchmont?

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Languidly_.]  Thank you, Mr. Montford, I never touch
supper.  [_Rises hastily and takes his arm_.]  But I will sit beside you,
and watch you.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I like being watched when I am eating!

MRS. MARCHMONT.  Then I will watch some one else.

MR. MONTFORD.  I don’t know that I should like that either.

MRS. MARCHMONT.  [_Severely_.]  Pray, Mr. Montford, do not make these
painful scenes of jealousy in public!

[_They go downstairs with the other guests_, _passing_ SIR ROBERT
CHILTERN _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY, _who now enter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And are you going to any of our country houses
before you leave England, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I can’t stand your English house-parties.  In
England people actually try to be brilliant at breakfast.  That is so
dreadful of them!  Only dull people are brilliant at breakfast.  And then
the family skeleton is always reading family prayers.  My stay in England
really depends on you, Sir Robert.  [_Sits down on the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking a seat beside her_.]  Seriously?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Quite seriously.  I want to talk to you about a great
political and financial scheme, about this Argentine Canal Company, in
fact.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What a tedious, practical subject for you to talk
about, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I like tedious, practical subjects.  What I don’t
like are tedious, practical people.  There is a wide difference.
Besides, you are interested, I know, in International Canal schemes.  You
were Lord Radley’s secretary, weren’t you, when the Government bought the
Suez Canal shares?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  But the Suez Canal was a very great and
splendid undertaking.  It gave us our direct route to India.  It had
imperial value.  It was necessary that we should have control.  This
Argentine scheme is a commonplace Stock Exchange swindle.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A speculation, Sir Robert!  A brilliant, daring
speculation.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Believe me, Mrs. Cheveley, it is a swindle.  Let us
call things by their proper names.  It makes matters simpler.  We have
all the information about it at the Foreign Office.  In fact, I sent out
a special Commission to inquire into the matter privately, and they
report that the works are hardly begun, and as for the money already
subscribed, no one seems to know what has become of it.  The whole thing
is a second Panama, and with not a quarter of the chance of success that
miserable affair ever had.  I hope you have not invested in it.  I am
sure you are far too clever to have done that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have invested very largely in it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who could have advised you to do such a foolish
thing?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your old friend—and mine.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Who?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Baron Arnheim.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Frowning_.]  Ah! yes.  I remember hearing, at the
time of his death, that he had been mixed up in the whole affair.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was his last romance.  His last but one, to do him
justice.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  But you have not seen my Corots yet.
They are in the music-room.  Corots seem to go with music, don’t they?
May I show them to you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  I am not in a mood to-night for
silver twilights, or rose-pink dawns.  I want to talk business.
[_Motions to him with her fan to sit down again beside her_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I have no advice to give you, Mrs. Cheveley,
except to interest yourself in something less dangerous.  The success of
the Canal depends, of course, on the attitude of England, and I am going
to lay the report of the Commissioners before the House to-morrow night.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  That you must not do.  In your own interests, Sir Robert,
to say nothing of mine, you must not do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at her in wonder_.]  In my own interests?
My dear Mrs. Cheveley, what do you mean?  [_Sits down beside her_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Sir Robert, I will be quite frank with you.  I want you
to withdraw the report that you had intended to lay before the House, on
the ground that you have reasons to believe that the Commissioners have
been prejudiced or misinformed, or something.  Then I want you to say a
few words to the effect that the Government is going to reconsider the
question, and that you have reason to believe that the Canal, if
completed, will be of great international value.  You know the sort of
things ministers say in cases of this kind.  A few ordinary platitudes
will do.  In modern life nothing produces such an effect as a good
platitude.  It makes the whole world kin.  Will you do that for me?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley, you cannot be serious in making me
such a proposition!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am quite serious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Pray allow me to believe that you are
not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Speaking with great deliberation and emphasis_.]  Ah!
but I am.  And if you do what I ask you, I . . . will pay you very
handsomely!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Pay me!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am afraid I don’t quite understand what you mean.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Leaning back on the sofa and looking at him_.]  How
very disappointing!  And I have come all the way from Vienna in order
that you should thoroughly understand me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I fear I don’t.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In her most nonchalant manner_.]  My dear Sir Robert,
you are a man of the world, and you have your price, I suppose.
Everybody has nowadays.  The drawback is that most people are so
dreadfully expensive.  I know I am.  I hope you will be more reasonable
in your terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises indignantly_.]  If you will allow me, I
will call your carriage for you.  You have lived so long abroad, Mrs.
Cheveley, that you seem to be unable to realise that you are talking to
an English gentleman.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Detains him by touching his arm with her fan_, _and
keeping it there while she is talking_.]  I realise that I am talking to
a man who laid the foundation of his fortune by selling to a Stock
Exchange speculator a Cabinet secret.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Rising and facing him_.]  I mean that I know the real
origin of your wealth and your career, and I have got your letter, too.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Contemptuously_.]  The letter you wrote to Baron
Arnheim, when you were Lord Radley’s secretary, telling the Baron to buy
Suez Canal shares—a letter written three days before the Government
announced its own purchase.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Hoarsely_.]  It is not true.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You thought that letter had been destroyed.  How foolish
of you!  It is in my possession.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  The affair to which you allude was no more than a
speculation.  The House of Commons had not yet passed the bill; it might
have been rejected.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It was a swindle, Sir Robert.  Let us call things by
their proper names.  It makes everything simpler.  And now I am going to
sell you that letter, and the price I ask for it is your public support
of the Argentine scheme.  You made your own fortune out of one canal.
You must help me and my friends to make our fortunes out of another!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is infamous, what you propose—infamous!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  This is the game of life as we all have to play
it, Sir Robert, sooner or later!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot do what you ask me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You mean you cannot help doing it.  You know you are
standing on the edge of a precipice.  And it is not for you to make
terms.  It is for you to accept them.  Supposing you refuse—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What then?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My dear Sir Robert, what then?  You are ruined, that is
all!  Remember to what a point your Puritanism in England has brought
you.  In old days nobody pretended to be a bit better than his
neighbours.  In fact, to be a bit better than one’s neighbour was
considered excessively vulgar and middle-class.  Nowadays, with our
modern mania for morality, every one has to pose as a paragon of purity,
incorruptibility, and all the other seven deadly virtues—and what is the
result?  You all go over like ninepins—one after the other.  Not a year
passes in England without somebody disappearing.  Scandals used to lend
charm, or at least interest, to a man—now they crush him.  And yours is a
very nasty scandal. You couldn’t survive it.  If it were known that as a
young man, secretary to a great and important minister, you sold a
Cabinet secret for a large sum of money, and that that was the origin of
your wealth and career, you would be hounded out of public life, you
would disappear completely.  And after all, Sir Robert, why should you
sacrifice your entire future rather than deal diplomatically with your
enemy?  For the moment I am your enemy.  I admit it!  And I am much
stronger than you are.  The big battalions are on my side.  You have a
splendid position, but it is your splendid position that makes you so
vulnerable.  You can’t defend it!  And I am in attack.  Of course I have
not talked morality to you.  You must admit in fairness that I have
spared you that.  Years ago you did a clever, unscrupulous thing; it
turned out a great success.  You owe to it your fortune and position.
And now you have got to pay for it.  Sooner or later we have all to pay
for what we do.  You have to pay now.  Before I leave you to-night, you
have got to promise me to suppress your report, and to speak in the House
in favour of this scheme.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What you ask is impossible.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You must make it possible.  You are going to make it
possible.  Sir Robert, you know what your English newspapers are like.
Suppose that when I leave this house I drive down to some newspaper
office, and give them this scandal and the proofs of it!  Think of their
loathsome joy, of the delight they would have in dragging you down, of
the mud and mire they would plunge you in.  Think of the hypocrite with
his greasy smile penning his leading article, and arranging the foulness
of the public placard.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stop!  You want me to withdraw the report and to
make a short speech stating that I believe there are possibilities in the
scheme?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down on the sofa_.]  Those are my terms.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_In a low voice_.]  I will give you any sum of
money you want.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Even you are not rich enough, Sir Robert, to buy back
your past.  No man is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will not do what you ask me.  I will not.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You have to.  If you don’t . . . [_Rises from the sofa_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bewildered and unnerved_.]  Wait a moment!  What
did you propose?  You said that you would give me back my letter, didn’t
you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  That is agreed.  I will be in the Ladies’ Gallery
to-morrow night at half-past eleven.  If by that time—and you will have
had heaps of opportunity—you have made an announcement to the House in
the terms I wish, I shall hand you back your letter with the prettiest
thanks, and the best, or at any rate the most suitable, compliment I can
think of.  I intend to play quite fairly with you.  One should always
play fairly . . . when one has the winning cards.  The Baron taught me
that . . . amongst other things.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You must let me have time to consider your
proposal.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  No; you must settle now!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Give me a week—three days!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Impossible!  I have got to telegraph to Vienna to-night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My God! what brought you into my life?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Circumstances.  [_Moves towards the door_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Don’t go.  I consent.  The report shall be
withdrawn.  I will arrange for a question to be put to me on the subject.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  I knew we should come to an amicable
agreement.  I understood your nature from the first.  I analysed you,
though you did not adore me.  And now you can get my carriage for me, Sir
Robert.  I see the people coming up from supper, and Englishmen always
get romantic after a meal, and that bores me dreadfully.  [_Exit_ SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN.]

[_Enter Guests_, LADY CHILTERN, LADY MARKBY, LORD CAVERSHAM, LADY
BASILDON, MRS. MARCHMONT, VICOMTE DE NANJAC, MR. MONTFORD.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, dear Mrs. Cheveley, I hope you have enjoyed yourself.
Sir Robert is very entertaining, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Most entertaining!  I have enjoyed my talk with him
immensely.

LADY MARKBY.  He has had a very interesting and brilliant career.  And he
has married a most admirable wife.  Lady Chiltern is a woman of the very
highest principles, I am glad to say.  I am a little too old now, myself,
to trouble about setting a good example, but I always admire people who
do.  And Lady Chiltern has a very ennobling effect on life, though her
dinner-parties are rather dull sometimes.  But one can’t have everything,
can one?  And now I must go, dear.  Shall I call for you to-morrow?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.

LADY MARKBY.  We might drive in the Park at five.  Everything looks so
fresh in the Park now!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except the people!

LADY MARKBY.  Perhaps the people are a little jaded.  I have often
observed that the Season as it goes on produces a kind of softening of
the brain.  However, I think anything is better than high intellectual
pressure.  That is the most unbecoming thing there is.  It makes the
noses of the young girls so particularly large.  And there is nothing so
difficult to marry as a large nose; men don’t like them.  Good-night,
dear!  [_To_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Good-night, Gertrude!  [_Goes out on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _arm_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What a charming house you have, Lady Chiltern!  I have
spent a delightful evening.  It has been so interesting getting to know
your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  Why did you wish to meet my husband, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I will tell you.  I wanted to interest him in this
Argentine Canal scheme, of which I dare say you have heard.  And I found
him most susceptible,—susceptible to reason, I mean.  A rare thing in a
man.  I converted him in ten minutes.  He is going to make a speech in
the House to-morrow night in favour of the idea.  We must go to the
Ladies’ Gallery and hear him!  It will be a great occasion!

LADY CHILTERN.  There must be some mistake.  That scheme could never have
my husband’s support.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, I assure you it’s all settled.  I don’t regret my
tedious journey from Vienna now.  It has been a great success.  But, of
course, for the next twenty-four hours the whole thing is a dead secret.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gently_.]  A secret?  Between whom?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a flash of amusement in her eyes_.]  Between your
husband and myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Entering_.]  Your carriage is here, Mrs.
Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks!  Good evening, Lady Chiltern!  Good-night, Lord
Goring!  I am at Claridge’s.  Don’t you think you might leave a card?

LORD GORING.  If you wish it, Mrs. Cheveley!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, don’t be so solemn about it, or I shall be obliged to
leave a card on you.  In England I suppose that would hardly be
considered en règle.  Abroad, we are more civilised.  Will you see me
down, Sir Robert?  Now that we have both the same interests at heart we
shall be great friends, I hope!

[_Sails out on_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN’S _arm_.  LADY CHILTERN _goes to the
top of the staircase and looks down at them as they descend_.  _Her
expression is troubled_.  _After a little time she is joined by some of
the guests_, _and passes with them into another reception-room_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a horrid woman!

LORD GORING.  You should go to bed, Miss Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  My father told me to go to bed an hour ago.  I don’t see
why I shouldn’t give you the same advice.  I always pass on good advice.
It is the only thing to do with it.  It is never of any use to oneself.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, you are always ordering me out of the room.
I think it most courageous of you.  Especially as I am not going to bed
for hours.  [_Goes over to the sofa_.]  You can come and sit down if you
like, and talk about anything in the world, except the Royal Academy,
Mrs. Cheveley, or novels in Scotch dialect.  They are not improving
subjects.  [_Catches sight of something that is lying on the sofa half
hidden by the cushion_.]  What is this?  Some one has dropped a diamond
brooch!  Quite beautiful, isn’t it?  [_Shows it to him_.]  I wish it was
mine, but Gertrude won’t let me wear anything but pearls, and I am
thoroughly sick of pearls.  They make one look so plain, so good and so
intellectual.  I wonder whom the brooch belongs to.

LORD GORING.  I wonder who dropped it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is a beautiful brooch.

LORD GORING.  It is a handsome bracelet.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It isn’t a bracelet.  It’s a brooch.

LORD GORING.  It can be used as a bracelet.  [_Takes it from her_, _and_,
_pulling out a green letter-case_, _puts the ornament carefully in it_,
_and replaces the whole thing in his breast-pocket with the most perfect
sang froid_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LORD GORING.  Miss Mabel, I am going to make a rather strange request to
you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh, pray do!  I have been waiting for it
all the evening.

LORD GORING.  [_Is a little taken aback_, _but recovers himself_.]  Don’t
mention to anybody that I have taken charge of this brooch.  Should any
one write and claim it, let me know at once.

MABEL CHILTERN.  That is a strange request.

LORD GORING.  Well, you see I gave this brooch to somebody once, years
ago.

MABEL CHILTERN.  You did?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

[LADY CHILTERN _enters alone_.  _The other guests have gone_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Then I shall certainly bid you good-night.  Good-night,
Gertrude!  [_Exit_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night, dear!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  You saw whom Lady
Markby brought here to-night?

LORD GORING.  Yes.  It was an unpleasant surprise.  What did she come
here for?

LADY CHILTERN.  Apparently to try and lure Robert to uphold some
fraudulent scheme in which she is interested.  The Argentine Canal, in
fact.

LORD GORING.  She has mistaken her man, hasn’t she?

LADY CHILTERN.  She is incapable of understanding an upright nature like
my husband’s!

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I should fancy she came to grief if she tried to get
Robert into her toils.  It is extraordinary what astounding mistakes
clever women make.

LADY CHILTERN.  I don’t call women of that kind clever.  I call them
stupid!

LORD GORING.  Same thing often.  Good-night, Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good-night!

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, you are not going?  Do stop a
little!

LORD GORING.  Afraid I can’t, thanks.  I have promised to look in at the
Hartlocks’.  I believe they have got a mauve Hungarian band that plays
mauve Hungarian music.  See you soon.  Good-bye!

[_Exit_]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  How beautiful you look to-night, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it is not true, is it?  You are not going to lend
your support to this Argentine speculation?  You couldn’t!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Starting_.]  Who told you I intended to do so?

LADY CHILTERN.  That woman who has just gone out, Mrs. Cheveley, as she
calls herself now.  She seemed to taunt me with it.  Robert, I know this
woman.  You don’t.  We were at school together.  She was untruthful,
dishonest, an evil influence on every one whose trust or friendship she
could win.  I hated, I despised her.  She stole things, she was a thief.
She was sent away for being a thief.  Why do you let her influence you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, what you tell me may be true, but it
happened many years ago.  It is best forgotten!  Mrs. Cheveley may have
changed since then.  No one should be entirely judged by their past.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  One’s past is what one is.  It is the only
way by which people should be judged.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That is a hard saying, Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  It is a true saying, Robert.  And what did she mean by
boasting that she had got you to lend your support, your name, to a thing
I have heard you describe as the most dishonest and fraudulent scheme
there has ever been in political life?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Biting his lip_.]  I was mistaken in the view I
took.  We all may make mistakes.

LADY CHILTERN.  But you told me yesterday that you had received the
report from the Commission, and that it entirely condemned the whole
thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Walking up and down_.]  I have reasons now to
believe that the Commission was prejudiced, or, at any rate, misinformed.
Besides, Gertrude, public and private life are different things.  They
have different laws, and move on different lines.

LADY CHILTERN.  They should both represent man at his highest.  I see no
difference between them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Stopping_.]  In the present case, on a matter of
practical politics, I have changed my mind.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  All!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sternly_.]  Yes!

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert!  Oh! it is horrible that I should have to ask you
such a question—Robert, are you telling me the whole truth?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why do you ask me such a question?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Why do you not answer it?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sitting down_.]  Gertrude, truth is a very
complex thing, and politics is a very complex business.  There are wheels
within wheels.  One may be under certain obligations to people that one
must pay.  Sooner or later in political life one has to compromise.
Every one does.

LADY CHILTERN.  Compromise?  Robert, why do you talk so differently
to-night from the way I have always heard you talk?  Why are you changed?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am not changed.  But circumstances alter things.

LADY CHILTERN.  Circumstances should never alter principles!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But if I told you—

LADY CHILTERN.  What?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That it was necessary, vitally necessary?

LADY CHILTERN.  It can never be necessary to do what is not honourable.
Or if it be necessary, then what is it that I have loved!  But it is not,
Robert; tell me it is not.  Why should it be?  What gain would you get?
Money?  We have no need of that!  And money that comes from a tainted
source is a degradation.  Power?  But power is nothing in itself.  It is
power to do good that is fine—that, and that only.  What is it, then?
Robert, tell me why you are going to do this dishonourable thing!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, you have no right to use that word.  I
told you it was a question of rational compromise.  It is no more than
that.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, that is all very well for other men, for men who
treat life simply as a sordid speculation; but not for you, Robert, not
for you.  You are different.  All your life you have stood apart from
others.  You have never let the world soil you.  To the world, as to
myself, you have been an ideal always.  Oh! be that ideal still.  That
great inheritance throw not away—that tower of ivory do not destroy.
Robert, men can love what is beneath them—things unworthy, stained,
dishonoured.  We women worship when we love; and when we lose our
worship, we lose everything.  Oh! don’t kill my love for you, don’t kill
that!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  I know that there are men with horrible secrets in their
lives—men who have done some shameful thing, and who in some critical
moment have to pay for it, by doing some other act of shame—oh! don’t
tell me you are such as they are!  Robert, is there in your life any
secret dishonour or disgrace?  Tell me, tell me at once, that—

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That what?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Speaking very slowly_.]  That our lives may drift
apart.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Drift apart?

LADY CHILTERN.  That they may be entirely separate.  It would be better
for us both.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, there is nothing in my past life that you
might not know.

LADY CHILTERN.  I was sure of it, Robert, I was sure of it.  But why did
you say those dreadful things, things so unlike your real self?  Don’t
let us ever talk about the subject again.  You will write, won’t you, to
Mrs. Cheveley, and tell her that you cannot support this scandalous
scheme of hers?  If you have given her any promise you must take it back,
that is all!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Must I write and tell her that?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely, Robert!  What else is there to do?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I might see her personally.  It would be better.

LADY CHILTERN.  You must never see her again, Robert.  She is not a woman
you should ever speak to.  She is not worthy to talk to a man like you.
No; you must write to her at once, now, this moment, and let your letter
show her that your decision is quite irrevocable!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Write this moment!

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But it is so late.  It is close on twelve.

LADY CHILTERN.  That makes no matter.  She must know at once that she has
been mistaken in you—and that you are not a man to do anything base or
underhand or dishonourable.  Write here, Robert.  Write that you decline
to support this scheme of hers, as you hold it to be a dishonest scheme.
Yes—write the word dishonest.  She knows what that word means.  [SIR
ROBERT CHILTERN _sits down and writes a letter_.  _His wife takes it up
and reads it_.]  Yes; that will do.  [_Rings bell_.]  And now the
envelope.  [_He writes the envelope slowly_.  _Enter_ MASON.]  Have this
letter sent at once to Claridge’s Hotel.  There is no answer.  [_Exit_
MASON.  LADY CHILTERN _kneels down beside her husband_, _and puts her
arms around him_.]  Robert, love gives one an instinct to things.  I feel
to-night that I have saved you from something that might have been a
danger to you, from something that might have made men honour you less
than they do.  I don’t think you realise sufficiently, Robert, that you
have brought into the political life of our time a nobler atmosphere, a
finer attitude towards life, a freer air of purer aims and higher
ideals—I know it, and for that I love you, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, love me always, Gertrude, love me always!

LADY CHILTERN.  I will love you always, because you will always be worthy
of love.  We needs must love the highest when we see it!  [_Kisses him
and rises and goes out_.]

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down for a moment_; _then sits down
and buries his face in his hands_.  _The Servant enters and begins
pulling out the lights_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _looks up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Put out the lights, Mason, put out the lights!

[_The Servant puts out the lights_.  _The room becomes almost dark_.
_The only light there is comes from the great chandelier that hangs over
the staircase and illumines the tapestry of the Triumph of Love_.]

SECOND ACT


SCENE


_Morning-room at Sir Robert Chiltern’s house_.

[LORD GORING, _dressed in the height of fashion_, _is lounging in an
armchair_.  SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is standing in front of the fireplace_.
_He is evidently in a state of great mental excitement and distress_.
_As the scene progresses he paces nervously up and down the room_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, it’s a very awkward business, very awkward
indeed.  You should have told your wife the whole thing.  Secrets from
other people’s wives are a necessary luxury in modern life.  So, at
least, I am always told at the club by people who are bald enough to know
better.  But no man should have a secret from his own wife.  She
invariably finds it out.  Women have a wonderful instinct about things.
They can discover everything except the obvious.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I couldn’t tell my wife.  When could I have
told her?  Not last night.  It would have made a life-long separation
between us, and I would have lost the love of the one woman in the world
I worship, of the only woman who has ever stirred love within me.  Last
night it would have been quite impossible.  She would have turned from me
in horror . . . in horror and in contempt.

LORD GORING.  Is Lady Chiltern as perfect as all that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; my wife is as perfect as all that.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking off his left-hand glove_.]  What a pity!  I beg
your pardon, my dear fellow, I didn’t quite mean that.  But if what you
tell me is true, I should like to have a serious talk about life with
Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would be quite useless.

LORD GORING.  May I try?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes; but nothing could make her alter her views.

LORD GORING.  Well, at the worst it would simply be a psychological
experiment.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  All such experiments are terribly dangerous.

LORD GORING.  Everything is dangerous, my dear fellow.  If it wasn’t so,
life wouldn’t be worth living. . . . Well, I am bound to say that I think
you should have told her years ago.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When?  When we were engaged?  Do you think she
would have married me if she had known that the origin of my fortune is
such as it is, the basis of my career such as it is, and that I had done
a thing that I suppose most men would call shameful and dishonourable?

LORD GORING.  [_Slowly_.]  Yes; most men would call it ugly names.  There
is no doubt of that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Bitterly_.]  Men who every day do something of
the same kind themselves.  Men who, each one of them, have worse secrets
in their own lives.

LORD GORING.  That is the reason they are so pleased to find out other
people’s secrets.  It distracts public attention from their own.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And, after all, whom did I wrong by what I did?  No
one.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at him steadily_.]  Except yourself, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Of course I had private
information about a certain transaction contemplated by the Government of
the day, and I acted on it.  Private information is practically the
source of every large modern fortune.

LORD GORING.  [_Tapping his boot with his cane_.]  And public scandal
invariably the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Pacing up and down the room_.]  Arthur, do you
think that what I did nearly eighteen years ago should be brought up
against me now?  Do you think it fair that a man’s whole career should be
ruined for a fault done in one’s boyhood almost?  I was twenty-two at the
time, and I had the double misfortune of being well-born and poor, two
unforgiveable things nowadays.  Is it fair that the folly, the sin of
one’s youth, if men choose to call it a sin, should wreck a life like
mine, should place me in the pillory, should shatter all that I have
worked for, all that I have built up.  Is it fair, Arthur?

LORD GORING.  Life is never fair, Robert.  And perhaps it is a good thing
for most of us that it is not.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Every man of ambition has to fight his century with
its own weapons.  What this century worships is wealth.  The God of this
century is wealth.  To succeed one must have wealth.  At all costs one
must have wealth.

LORD GORING.  You underrate yourself, Robert.  Believe me, without wealth
you could have succeeded just as well.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was old, perhaps.  When I had lost my
passion for power, or could not use it.  When I was tired, worn out,
disappointed.  I wanted my success when I was young.  Youth is the time
for success.  I couldn’t wait.

LORD GORING.  Well, you certainly have had your success while you are
still young.  No one in our day has had such a brilliant success.
Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs at the age of forty—that’s good
enough for any one, I should think.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And if it is all taken away from me now?  If I lose
everything over a horrible scandal?  If I am hounded from public life?

LORD GORING.  Robert, how could you have sold yourself for money?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Excitedly_.]  I did not sell myself for money.  I
bought success at a great price.  That is all.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  Yes; you certainly paid a great price for it.
But what first made you think of doing such a thing?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Baron Arnheim.

LORD GORING.  Damned scoundrel!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; he was a man of a most subtle and refined
intellect.  A man of culture, charm, and distinction.  One of the most
intellectual men I ever met.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer a gentlemanly fool any day.  There is more to
be said for stupidity than people imagine.  Personally I have a great
admiration for stupidity.  It is a sort of fellow-feeling, I suppose.
But how did he do it?  Tell me the whole thing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Throws himself into an armchair by the
writing-table_.]  One night after dinner at Lord Radley’s the Baron began
talking about success in modern life as something that one could reduce
to an absolutely definite science.  With that wonderfully fascinating
quiet voice of his he expounded to us the most terrible of all
philosophies, the philosophy of power, preached to us the most marvellous
of all gospels, the gospel of gold.  I think he saw the effect he had
produced on me, for some days afterwards he wrote and asked me to come
and see him.  He was living then in Park Lane, in the house Lord Woolcomb
has now.  I remember so well how, with a strange smile on his pale,
curved lips, he led me through his wonderful picture gallery, showed me
his tapestries, his enamels, his jewels, his carved ivories, made me
wonder at the strange loveliness of the luxury in which he lived; and
then told me that luxury was nothing but a background, a painted scene in
a play, and that power, power over other men, power over the world, was
the one thing worth having, the one supreme pleasure worth knowing, the
one joy one never tired of, and that in our century only the rich
possessed it.

LORD GORING.  [_With great deliberation_.]  A thoroughly shallow creed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  I didn’t think so then.  I don’t think
so now.  Wealth has given me enormous power.  It gave me at the very
outset of my life freedom, and freedom is everything.  You have never
been poor, and never known what ambition is.  You cannot understand what
a wonderful chance the Baron gave me.  Such a chance as few men get.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately for them, if one is to judge by results.  But
tell me definitely, how did the Baron finally persuade you to—well, to do
what you did?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  When I was going away he said to me that if I ever
could give him any private information of real value he would make me a
very rich man.  I was dazed at the prospect he held out to me, and my
ambition and my desire for power were at that time boundless.  Six weeks
later certain private documents passed through my hands.

LORD GORING.  [_Keeping his eyes steadily fixed on the carpet_.]  State
documents?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes.  [LORD GORING _sighs_, _then passes his hand
across his forehead and looks up_.]

LORD GORING.  I had no idea that you, of all men in the world, could have
been so weak, Robert, as to yield to such a temptation as Baron Arnheim
held out to you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Weak?  Oh, I am sick of hearing that phrase.  Sick
of using it about others.  Weak?  Do you really think, Arthur, that it is
weakness that yields to temptation?  I tell you that there are terrible
temptations that it requires strength, strength and courage, to yield to.
To stake all one’s life on a single moment, to risk everything on one
throw, whether the stake be power or pleasure, I care not—there is no
weakness in that.  There is a horrible, a terrible courage.  I had that
courage.  I sat down the same afternoon and wrote Baron Arnheim the
letter this woman now holds.  He made three-quarters of a million over
the transaction.

LORD GORING.  And you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I received from the Baron £110,000.

LORD GORING.  You were worth more, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; that money gave me exactly what I wanted, power
over others.  I went into the House immediately.  The Baron advised me in
finance from time to time.  Before five years I had almost trebled my
fortune.  Since then everything that I have touched has turned out a
success.  In all things connected with money I have had a luck so
extraordinary that sometimes it has made me almost afraid.  I remember
having read somewhere, in some strange book, that when the gods wish to
punish us they answer our prayers.

LORD GORING.  But tell me, Robert, did you never suffer any regret for
what you had done?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No.  I felt that I had fought the century with its
own weapons, and won.

LORD GORING.  [_Sadly_.]  You thought you had won.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I thought so.  [_After a long pause_.]  Arthur, do
you despise me for what I have told you?

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  I am very sorry for
you, Robert, very sorry indeed.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I don’t say that I suffered any remorse.  I didn’t.
Not remorse in the ordinary, rather silly sense of the word.  But I have
paid conscience money many times.  I had a wild hope that I might disarm
destiny.  The sum Baron Arnheim gave me I have distributed twice over in
public charities since then.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking up_.]  In public charities?  Dear me! what a lot
of harm you must have done, Robert!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh, don’t say that, Arthur; don’t talk like that!

LORD GORING.  Never mind what I say, Robert!  I am always saying what I
shouldn’t say.  In fact, I usually say what I really think.  A great
mistake nowadays.  It makes one so liable to be misunderstood.  As
regards this dreadful business, I will help you in whatever way I can.
Of course you know that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you, Arthur, thank you.  But what is to be
done?  What can be done?

LORD GORING.  [_Leaning back with his hands in his pockets_.]  Well, the
English can’t stand a man who is always saying he is in the right, but
they are very fond of a man who admits that he has been in the wrong.  It
is one of the best things in them.  However, in your case, Robert, a
confession would not do.  The money, if you will allow me to say so, is
. . . awkward.  Besides, if you did make a clean breast of the whole
affair, you would never be able to talk morality again.  And in England a
man who can’t talk morality twice a week to a large, popular, immoral
audience is quite over as a serious politician.  There would be nothing
left for him as a profession except Botany or the Church.  A confession
would be of no use.  It would ruin you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It would ruin me.  Arthur, the only thing for me to
do now is to fight the thing out.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising from his chair_.]  I was waiting for you to say
that, Robert.  It is the only thing to do now.  And you must begin by
telling your wife the whole story.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  That I will not do.

LORD GORING.  Robert, believe me, you are wrong.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I couldn’t do it.  It would kill her love for me.
And now about this woman, this Mrs. Cheveley.  How can I defend myself
against her?  You knew her before, Arthur, apparently.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Did you know her well?

LORD GORING.  [_Arranging his necktie_.]  So little that I got engaged to
be married to her once, when I was staying at the Tenbys’.  The affair
lasted for three days . . . nearly.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Why was it broken off?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  Oh, I forget.  At least, it makes no matter.
By the way, have you tried her with money?  She used to be confoundedly
fond of money.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I offered her any sum she wanted.  She refused.

LORD GORING.  Then the marvellous gospel of gold breaks down sometimes.
The rich can’t do everything, after all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not everything.  I suppose you are right.  Arthur,
I feel that public disgrace is in store for me.  I feel certain of it.  I
never knew what terror was before.  I know it now.  It is as if a hand of
ice were laid upon one’s heart.  It is as if one’s heart were beating
itself to death in some empty hollow.

LORD GORING.  [_Striking the table_.]  Robert, you must fight her.  You
must fight her.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  But how?

LORD GORING.  I can’t tell you how at present.  I have not the smallest
idea.  But every one has some weak point.  There is some flaw in each one
of us.  [_Strolls to the fireplace and looks at himself in the glass_.]
My father tells me that even I have faults.  Perhaps I have.  I don’t
know.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  In defending myself against Mrs. Cheveley, I have a
right to use any weapon I can find, have I not?

LORD GORING.  [_Still looking in the glass_.]  In your place I don’t
think I should have the smallest scruple in doing so.  She is thoroughly
well able to take care of herself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sits down at the table and takes a pen in his
hand_.]  Well, I shall send a cipher telegram to the Embassy at Vienna,
to inquire if there is anything known against her.  There may be some
secret scandal she might be afraid of.

LORD GORING.  [_Settling his buttonhole_.]  Oh, I should fancy Mrs.
Cheveley is one of those very modern women of our time who find a new
scandal as becoming as a new bonnet, and air them both in the Park every
afternoon at five-thirty.  I am sure she adores scandals, and that the
sorrow of her life at present is that she can’t manage to have enough of
them.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Writing_.]  Why do you say that?

LORD GORING.  [_Turning round_.]  Well, she wore far too much rouge last
night, and not quite enough clothes.  That is always a sign of despair in
a woman.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Striking a bell_.]  But it is worth while my
wiring to Vienna, is it not?

LORD GORING.  It is always worth while asking a question, though it is
not always worth while answering one.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Is Mr. Trafford in his room?

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Puts what he has written into an envelope_,
_which he then carefully closes_.]  Tell him to have this sent off in
cipher at once.  There must not be a moment’s delay.

MASON.  Yes, Sir Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! just give that back to me again.

[_Writes something on the envelope_.  MASON _then goes out with the
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She must have had some curious hold over Baron
Arnheim.  I wonder what it was.

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I wonder.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I will fight her to the death, as long as my wife
knows nothing.

LORD GORING.  [_Strongly_.]  Oh, fight in any case—in any case.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  If my wife found
out, there would be little left to fight for.  Well, as soon as I hear
from Vienna, I shall let you know the result.  It is a chance, just a
chance, but I believe in it.  And as I fought the age with its own
weapons, I will fight her with her weapons.  It is only fair, and she
looks like a woman with a past, doesn’t she?

LORD GORING.  Most pretty women do.  But there is a fashion in pasts just
as there is a fashion in frocks.  Perhaps Mrs. Cheveley’s past is merely
a slightly décolleté one, and they are excessively popular nowadays.
Besides, my dear Robert, I should not build too high hopes on frightening
Mrs. Cheveley.  I should not fancy Mrs. Cheveley is a woman who would be
easily frightened.  She has survived all her creditors, and she shows
wonderful presence of mind.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! I live on hopes now.  I clutch at every chance.
I feel like a man on a ship that is sinking.  The water is round my feet,
and the very air is bitter with storm.  Hush! I hear my wife’s voice.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN _in walking dress_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good afternoon, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Good afternoon, Lady Chiltern!  Have you been in the Park?

LADY CHILTERN.  No; I have just come from the Woman’s Liberal
Association, where, by the way, Robert, your name was received with loud
applause, and now I have come in to have my tea.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
You will wait and have some tea, won’t you?

LORD GORING.  I’ll wait for a short time, thanks.

LADY CHILTERN.  I will be back in a moment.  I am only going to take my
hat off.

LORD GORING.  [_In his most earnest manner_.]  Oh! please don’t.  It is
so pretty.  One of the prettiest hats I ever saw.  I hope the Woman’s
Liberal Association received it with loud applause.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a smile_.]  We have much more important work to do
than look at each other’s bonnets, Lord Goring.

LORD GORING.  Really?  What sort of work?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! dull, useful, delightful things, Factory Acts, Female
Inspectors, the Eight Hours’ Bill, the Parliamentary Franchise. . . .
Everything, in fact, that you would find thoroughly uninteresting.

LORD GORING.  And never bonnets?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With mock indignation_.]  Never bonnets, never!

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out through the door leading to her boudoir_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes_ LORD GORING’S _hand_.]  You have been a
good friend to me, Arthur, a thoroughly good friend.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know that I have been able to do much for you,
Robert, as yet.  In fact, I have not been able to do anything for you, as
far as I can see.  I am thoroughly disappointed with myself.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You have enabled me to tell you the truth.  That is
something.  The truth has always stifled me.

LORD GORING.  Ah! the truth is a thing I get rid of as soon as possible!
Bad habit, by the way.  Makes one very unpopular at the club . . . with
the older members.  They call it being conceited.  Perhaps it is.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I would to God that I had been able to tell the
truth . . . to live the truth.  Ah! that is the great thing in life, to
live the truth.  [_Sighs_, _and goes towards the door_.]  I’ll see you
soon again, Arthur, shan’t I?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Whenever you like.  I’m going to look in at the
Bachelors’ Ball to-night, unless I find something better to do.  But I’ll
come round to-morrow morning.  If you should want me to-night by any
chance, send round a note to Curzon Street.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

[_As he reaches the door_, LADY CHILTERN _enters from her boudoir_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You are not going, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I have some letters to write, dear.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Going to him_.]  You work too hard, Robert.  You seem
never to think of yourself, and you are looking so tired.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is nothing, dear, nothing.

[_He kisses her and goes out_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Do sit down.  I am so glad you have
called.  I want to talk to you about . . . well, not about bonnets, or
the Woman’s Liberal Association.  You take far too much interest in the
first subject, and not nearly enough in the second.

LORD GORING.  You want to talk to me about Mrs. Cheveley?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.  You have guessed it.  After you left last night I
found out that what she had said was really true.  Of course I made
Robert write her a letter at once, withdrawing his promise.

LORD GORING.  So he gave me to understand.

LADY CHILTERN.  To have kept it would have been the first stain on a
career that has been stainless always.  Robert must be above reproach.
He is not like other men.  He cannot afford to do what other men do.
[_She looks at_ LORD GORING, _who remains silent_.]  Don’t you agree with
me?  You are Robert’s greatest friend.  You are our greatest friend, Lord
Goring.  No one, except myself, knows Robert better than you do.  He has
no secrets from me, and I don’t think he has any from you.

LORD GORING.  He certainly has no secrets from me.  At least I don’t
think so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Then am I not right in my estimate of him?  I know I am
right.  But speak to me frankly.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking straight at her_.]  Quite frankly?

LADY CHILTERN.  Surely.  You have nothing to conceal, have you?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.  But, my dear Lady Chiltern, I think, if you will
allow me to say so, that in practical life—

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  Of which you know so little, Lord Goring—

LORD GORING.  Of which I know nothing by experience, though I know
something by observation.  I think that in practical life there is
something about success, actual success, that is a little unscrupulous,
something about ambition that is unscrupulous always.  Once a man has set
his heart and soul on getting to a certain point, if he has to climb the
crag, he climbs the crag; if he has to walk in the mire—

LADY CHILTERN.  Well?

LORD GORING.  He walks in the mire.  Of course I am only talking
generally about life.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope so.  Why do you look at me so
strangely, Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have sometimes thought that . . . perhaps
you are a little hard in some of your views on life.  I think that . . .
often you don’t make sufficient allowances.  In every nature there are
elements of weakness, or worse than weakness.  Supposing, for instance,
that—that any public man, my father, or Lord Merton, or Robert, say, had,
years ago, written some foolish letter to some one . . .

LADY CHILTERN.  What do you mean by a foolish letter?

LORD GORING.  A letter gravely compromising one’s position.  I am only
putting an imaginary case.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert is as incapable of doing a foolish thing as he is
of doing a wrong thing.

LORD GORING.  [_After a long pause_.]  Nobody is incapable of doing a
foolish thing.  Nobody is incapable of doing a wrong thing.

LADY CHILTERN.  Are you a Pessimist?  What will the other dandies say?
They will all have to go into mourning.

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  No, Lady Chiltern, I am not a Pessimist.
Indeed I am not sure that I quite know what Pessimism really means.  All
I do know is that life cannot be understood without much charity, cannot
be lived without much charity.  It is love, and not German philosophy,
that is the true explanation of this world, whatever may be the
explanation of the next.  And if you are ever in trouble, Lady Chiltern,
trust me absolutely, and I will help you in every way I can.  If you ever
want me, come to me for my assistance, and you shall have it.  Come at
once to me.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him in surprise_.]  Lord Goring, you are
talking quite seriously.  I don’t think I ever heard you talk seriously
before.

LORD GORING.  [_Laughing_.]  You must excuse me, Lady Chiltern.  It won’t
occur again, if I can help it.

LADY CHILTERN.  But I like you to be serious.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN, _in the most ravishing frock_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear Gertrude, don’t say such a dreadful thing to Lord
Goring.  Seriousness would be very unbecoming to him.  Good afternoon
Lord Goring!  Pray be as trivial as you can.

LORD GORING.  I should like to, Miss Mabel, but I am afraid I am . . . a
little out of practice this morning; and besides, I have to be going now.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Just when I have come in!  What dreadful manners you
have!  I am sure you were very badly brought up.

LORD GORING.  I was.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I wish I had brought you up!

LORD GORING.  I am so sorry you didn’t.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is too late now, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Smiling_.]  I am not so sure.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Will you ride to-morrow morning?

LORD GORING.  Yes, at ten.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Don’t forget.

LORD GORING.  Of course I shan’t.  By the way, Lady Chiltern, there is no
list of your guests in _The Morning Post_ of to-day.  It has apparently
been crowded out by the County Council, or the Lambeth Conference, or
something equally boring.  Could you let me have a list?  I have a
particular reason for asking you.

LADY CHILTERN.  I am sure Mr. Trafford will be able to give you one.

LORD GORING.  Thanks, so much.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy is the most useful person in London.

LORD GORING [_Turning to her_.]  And who is the most ornamental?

MABEL CHILTERN [_Triumphantly_.]  I am.

LORD GORING.  How clever of you to guess it!  [_Takes up his hat and
cane_.]  Good-bye, Lady Chiltern!  You will remember what I said to you,
won’t you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; but I don’t know why you said it to me.

LORD GORING.  I hardly know myself.  Good-bye, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN [_With a little moue of disappointment_.]  I wish you were
not going.  I have had four wonderful adventures this morning; four and a
half, in fact.  You might stop and listen to some of them.

LORD GORING.  How very selfish of you to have four and a half!  There
won’t be any left for me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I don’t want you to have any.  They would not be good
for you.

LORD GORING.  That is the first unkind thing you have ever said to me.
How charmingly you said it!  Ten to-morrow.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Sharp.

LORD GORING.  Quite sharp.  But don’t bring Mr. Trafford.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a little toss of the head_.]  Of course I shan’t
bring Tommy Trafford.  Tommy Trafford is in great disgrace.

LORD GORING.  I am delighted to hear it.  [_Bows and goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Gertrude, I wish you would speak to Tommy Trafford.

LADY CHILTERN.  What has poor Mr. Trafford done this time?  Robert says
he is the best secretary he has ever had.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, Tommy has proposed to me again.  Tommy really does
nothing but propose to me.  He proposed to me last night in the
music-room, when I was quite unprotected, as there was an elaborate trio
going on.  I didn’t dare to make the smallest repartee, I need hardly
tell you.  If I had, it would have stopped the music at once.  Musical
people are so absurdly unreasonable.  They always want one to be
perfectly dumb at the very moment when one is longing to be absolutely
deaf.  Then he proposed to me in broad daylight this morning, in front of
that dreadful statue of Achilles.  Really, the things that go on in front
of that work of art are quite appalling.  The police should interfere.
At luncheon I saw by the glare in his eye that he was going to propose
again, and I just managed to check him in time by assuring him that I was
a bimetallist.  Fortunately I don’t know what bimetallism means.  And I
don’t believe anybody else does either.  But the observation crushed
Tommy for ten minutes.  He looked quite shocked.  And then Tommy is so
annoying in the way he proposes.  If he proposed at the top of his voice,
I should not mind so much.  That might produce some effect on the public.
But he does it in a horrid confidential way.  When Tommy wants to be
romantic he talks to one just like a doctor.  I am very fond of Tommy,
but his methods of proposing are quite out of date.  I wish, Gertrude,
you would speak to him, and tell him that once a week is quite often
enough to propose to any one, and that it should always be done in a
manner that attracts some attention.

LADY CHILTERN.  Dear Mabel, don’t talk like that.  Besides, Robert thinks
very highly of Mr. Trafford.  He believes he has a brilliant future
before him.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I wouldn’t marry a man with a future before him for
anything under the sun.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know, dear.  You married a man with a future, didn’t
you?  But then Robert was a genius, and you have a noble,
self-sacrificing character.  You can stand geniuses.  I have no character
at all, and Robert is the only genius I could ever bear.  As a rule, I
think they are quite impossible.  Geniuses talk so much, don’t they?
Such a bad habit!  And they are always thinking about themselves, when I
want them to be thinking about me.  I must go round now and rehearse at
Lady Basildon’s.  You remember, we are having tableaux, don’t you?  The
Triumph of something, I don’t know what!  I hope it will be triumph of
me.  Only triumph I am really interested in at present.  [_Kisses_ LADY
CHILTERN _and goes out_; _then comes running back_.]  Oh, Gertrude, do
you know who is coming to see you?  That dreadful Mrs. Cheveley, in a
most lovely gown.  Did you ask her?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Mrs. Cheveley!  Coming to see me?
Impossible!

MABEL CHILTERN.  I assure you she is coming upstairs, as large as life
and not nearly so natural.

LADY CHILTERN.  You need not wait, Mabel.  Remember, Lady Basildon is
expecting you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I must shake hands with Lady Markby.  She is
delightful.  I love being scolded by her.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lady Markby.  Mrs. Cheveley.

[_Enter_ LADY MARKBY _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Advancing to meet them_.]  Dear Lady Markby, how nice
of you to come and see me!  [_Shakes hands with her_, _and bows somewhat
distantly to_ MRS. CHEVELEY.]  Won’t you sit down, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  Isn’t that Miss Chiltern?  I should like so much
to know her.

LADY CHILTERN.  Mabel, Mrs. Cheveley wishes to know you.

[MABEL CHILTERN _gives a little nod_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Sitting down_.]  I thought your frock so charming last
night, Miss Chiltern.  So simple and . . . suitable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Really?  I must tell my dressmaker.  It will be such a
surprise to her.  Good-bye, Lady Markby!

LADY MARKBY.  Going already?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am so sorry but I am obliged to.  I am just off to
rehearsal.  I have got to stand on my head in some tableaux.

LADY MARKBY.  On your head, child?  Oh! I hope not.  I believe it is most
unhealthy.  [_Takes a seat on the sofa next_ LADY CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  But it is for an excellent charity: in aid of the
Undeserving, the only people I am really interested in.  I am the
secretary, and Tommy Trafford is treasurer.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And what is Lord Goring?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! Lord Goring is president.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The post should suit him admirably, unless he has
deteriorated since I knew him first.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Reflecting_.]  You are remarkably modern, Mabel.  A
little too modern, perhaps.  Nothing is so dangerous as being too modern.
One is apt to grow old-fashioned quite suddenly.  I have known many
instances of it.

MABEL CHILTERN.  What a dreadful prospect!

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! my dear, you need not be nervous.  You will always be
as pretty as possible.  That is the best fashion there is, and the only
fashion that England succeeds in setting.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a curtsey_.]  Thank you so much, Lady Markby, for
England . . . and myself.  [_Goes out_.]

LADY MARKBY.  [_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  Dear Gertrude, we just
called to know if Mrs. Cheveley’s diamond brooch has been found.

LADY CHILTERN.  Here?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I missed it when I got back to Claridge’s, and I
thought I might possibly have dropped it here.

LADY CHILTERN.  I have heard nothing about it.  But I will send for the
butler and ask.  [_Touches the bell_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, pray don’t trouble, Lady Chiltern.  I dare say I lost
it at the Opera, before we came on here.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah yes, I suppose it must have been at the Opera.  The fact
is, we all scramble and jostle so much nowadays that I wonder we have
anything at all left on us at the end of an evening.  I know myself that,
when I am coming back from the Drawing Room, I always feel as if I hadn’t
a shred on me, except a small shred of decent reputation, just enough to
prevent the lower classes making painful observations through the windows
of the carriage.  The fact is that our Society is terribly
over-populated.  Really, some one should arrange a proper scheme of
assisted emigration.  It would do a great deal of good.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I quite agree with you, Lady Markby.  It is nearly six
years since I have been in London for the Season, and I must say Society
has become dreadfully mixed.  One sees the oddest people everywhere.

LADY MARKBY.  That is quite true, dear.  But one needn’t know them.  I’m
sure I don’t know half the people who come to my house.  Indeed, from all
I hear, I shouldn’t like to.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

LADY CHILTERN.  What sort of a brooch was it that you lost, Mrs.
Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby, a rather large ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  I thought you said there was a sapphire on the head, dear?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Smiling_.]  No, lady Markby—a ruby.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Nodding her head_.]  And very becoming, I am quite sure.

LADY CHILTERN.  Has a ruby and diamond brooch been found in any of the
rooms this morning, Mason?

MASON.  No, my lady.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  It really is of no consequence, Lady Chiltern.  I am so
sorry to have put you to any inconvenience.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Coldly_.]  Oh, it has been no inconvenience.  That will
do, Mason.  You can bring tea.

[_Exit_ MASON.]

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I must say it is most annoying to lose anything.  I
remember once at Bath, years ago, losing in the Pump Room an exceedingly
handsome cameo bracelet that Sir John had given me.  I don’t think he has
ever given me anything since, I am sorry to say.  He has sadly
degenerated.  Really, this horrid House of Commons quite ruins our
husbands for us.  I think the Lower House by far the greatest blow to a
happy married life that there has been since that terrible thing called
the Higher Education of Women was invented.

LADY CHILTERN.  Ah! it is heresy to say that in this house, Lady Markby.
Robert is a great champion of the Higher Education of Women, and so, I am
afraid, am I.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The higher education of men is what I should like to see.
Men need it so sadly.

LADY MARKBY.  They do, dear.  But I am afraid such a scheme would be
quite unpractical.  I don’t think man has much capacity for development.
He has got as far as he can, and that is not far, is it?  With regard to
women, well, dear Gertrude, you belong to the younger generation, and I
am sure it is all right if you approve of it.  In my time, of course, we
were taught not to understand anything.  That was the old system, and
wonderfully interesting it was.  I assure you that the amount of things I
and my poor dear sister were taught not to understand was quite
extraordinary.  But modern women understand everything, I am told.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Except their husbands.  That is the one thing the modern
woman never understands.

LADY MARKBY.  And a very good thing too, dear, I dare say.  It might
break up many a happy home if they did.  Not yours, I need hardly say,
Gertrude.  You have married a pattern husband.  I wish I could say as
much for myself.  But since Sir John has taken to attending the debates
regularly, which he never used to do in the good old days, his language
has become quite impossible.  He always seems to think that he is
addressing the House, and consequently whenever he discusses the state of
the agricultural labourer, or the Welsh Church, or something quite
improper of that kind, I am obliged to send all the servants out of the
room.  It is not pleasant to see one’s own butler, who has been with one
for twenty-three years, actually blushing at the side-board, and the
footmen making contortions in corners like persons in circuses.  I assure
you my life will be quite ruined unless they send John at once to the
Upper House.  He won’t take any interest in politics then, will he?  The
House of Lords is so sensible.  An assembly of gentlemen.  But in his
present state, Sir John is really a great trial.  Why, this morning
before breakfast was half over, he stood up on the hearthrug, put his
hands in his pockets, and appealed to the country at the top of his
voice.  I left the table as soon as I had my second cup of tea, I need
hardly say.  But his violent language could be heard all over the house!
I trust, Gertrude, that Sir Robert is not like that?

LADY CHILTERN.  But I am very much interested in politics, Lady Markby.
I love to hear Robert talk about them.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hope he is not as devoted to Blue Books as Sir John
is.  I don’t think they can be quite improving reading for any one.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Languidly_.]  I have never read a Blue Book.  I prefer
books . . . in yellow covers.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Genially unconscious_.]  Yellow is a gayer colour, is it
not?  I used to wear yellow a good deal in my early days, and would do so
now if Sir John was not so painfully personal in his observations, and a
man on the question of dress is always ridiculous, is he not?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh, no!  I think men are the only authorities on dress.

LADY MARKBY.  Really?  One wouldn’t say so from the sort of hats they
wear? would one?

[_The butler enters_, _followed by the footman_.  _Tea is set on a small
table close to_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  May I give you some tea, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  [_The butler hands_ MRS. CHEVELEY _a cup of tea
on a salver_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Some tea, Lady Markby?

LADY MARKBY.  No thanks, dear.  [_The servants go out_.]  The fact is, I
have promised to go round for ten minutes to see poor Lady Brancaster,
who is in very great trouble.  Her daughter, quite a well-brought-up
girl, too, has actually become engaged to be married to a curate in
Shropshire.  It is very sad, very sad indeed.  I can’t understand this
modern mania for curates.  In my time we girls saw them, of course,
running about the place like rabbits.  But we never took any notice of
them, I need hardly say.  But I am told that nowadays country society is
quite honeycombed with them.  I think it most irreligious.  And then the
eldest son has quarrelled with his father, and it is said that when they
meet at the club Lord Brancaster always hides himself behind the money
article in _The Times_.  However, I believe that is quite a common
occurrence nowadays and that they have to take in extra copies of _The
Times_ at all the clubs in St. James’s Street; there are so many sons who
won’t have anything to do with their fathers, and so many fathers who
won’t speak to their sons.  I think myself, it is very much to be
regretted.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  So do I.  Fathers have so much to learn from their sons
nowadays.

LADY MARKBY.  Really, dear?  What?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  The art of living.  The only really Fine Art we have
produced in modern times.

LADY MARKBY.  [_Shaking her head_.]  Ah!  I am afraid Lord Brancaster
knew a good deal about that.  More than his poor wife ever did.
[_Turning to_ LADY CHILTERN.]  You know Lady Brancaster, don’t you, dear?

LADY CHILTERN.  Just slightly.  She was staying at Langton last autumn,
when we were there.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, like all stout women, she looks the very picture of
happiness, as no doubt you noticed.  But there are many tragedies in her
family, besides this affair of the curate.  Her own sister, Mrs. Jekyll,
had a most unhappy life; through no fault of her own, I am sorry to say.
She ultimately was so broken-hearted that she went into a convent, or on
to the operatic stage, I forget which.  No; I think it was decorative
art-needlework she took up.  I know she had lost all sense of pleasure in
life.  [_Rising_.]  And now, Gertrude, if you will allow me, I shall
leave Mrs. Cheveley in your charge and call back for her in a quarter of
an hour.  Or perhaps, dear Mrs. Cheveley, you wouldn’t mind waiting in
the carriage while I am with Lady Brancaster.  As I intend it to be a
visit of condolence, I shan’t stay long.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Rising_.]  I don’t mind waiting in the carriage at all,
provided there is somebody to look at one.

LADY MARKBY.  Well, I hear the curate is always prowling about the house.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I am afraid I am not fond of girl friends.

LADY CHILTERN [_Rising_.]  Oh, I hope Mrs. Cheveley will stay here a
little.  I should like to have a few minutes’ conversation with her.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How very kind of you, Lady Chiltern!  Believe me, nothing
would give me greater pleasure.

LADY MARKBY.  Ah! no doubt you both have many pleasant reminiscences of
your schooldays to talk over together.  Good-bye, dear Gertrude!  Shall I
see you at Lady Bonar’s to-night?  She has discovered a wonderful new
genius.  He does . . . nothing at all, I believe.  That is a great
comfort, is it not?

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert and I are dining at home by ourselves to-night,
and I don’t think I shall go anywhere afterwards.  Robert, of course,
will have to be in the House.  But there is nothing interesting on.

LADY MARKBY.  Dining at home by yourselves?  Is that quite prudent?  Ah,
I forgot, your husband is an exception.  Mine is the general rule, and
nothing ages a woman so rapidly as having married the general rule.
[_Exit_ LADY MARKBY.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Wonderful woman, Lady Markby, isn’t she?  Talks more and
says less than anybody I ever met.  She is made to be a public speaker.
Much more so than her husband, though he is a typical Englishman, always
dull and usually violent.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Makes no answer_, _but remains standing_.  _There is a
pause_.  _Then the eyes of the two women meet_.  LADY CHILTERN _looks
stern and pale_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _seem rather amused_.]  Mrs. Cheveley, I
think it is right to tell you quite frankly that, had I known who you
really were, I should not have invited you to my house last night.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With an impertinent smile_.]  Really?

LADY CHILTERN.  I could not have done so.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I see that after all these years you have not changed a
bit, Gertrude.

LADY CHILTERN.  I never change.

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Elevating her eyebrows_.]  Then life has taught you
nothing?

LADY CHILTERN.  It has taught me that a person who has once been guilty
of a dishonest and dishonourable action may be guilty of it a second
time, and should be shunned.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Would you apply that rule to every one?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes, to every one, without exception.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then I am sorry for you, Gertrude, very sorry for you.

LADY CHILTERN.  You see now, I was sure, that for many reasons any
further acquaintance between us during your stay in London is quite
impossible?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_Leaning back in her chair_.]  Do you know, Gertrude, I
don’t mind your talking morality a bit.  Morality is simply the attitude
we adopt towards people whom we personally dislike.  You dislike me.  I
am quite aware of that.  And I have always detested you.  And yet I have
come here to do you a service.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Contemptuously_.]  Like the service you wished to
render my husband last night, I suppose.  Thank heaven, I saved him from
that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting to her feet_.]  It was you who made him write
that insolent letter to me?  It was you who made him break his promise?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Then you must make him keep it.  I give you till
to-morrow morning—no more.  If by that time your husband does not
solemnly bind himself to help me in this great scheme in which I am
interested—

LADY CHILTERN.  This fraudulent speculation—

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Call it what you choose.  I hold your husband in the
hollow of my hand, and if you are wise you will make him do what I tell
him.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising and going towards her_.]  You are impertinent.
What has my husband to do with you?  With a woman like you?

MRS. CHEVELEY [_With a bitter laugh_.]  In this world like meets with
like.  It is because your husband is himself fraudulent and dishonest
that we pair so well together.  Between you and him there are chasms.  He
and I are closer than friends.  We are enemies linked together.  The same
sin binds us.

LADY CHILTERN.  How dare you class my husband with yourself?  How dare
you threaten him or me?  Leave my house.  You are unfit to enter it.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _enters from behind_.  _He hears his wife’s last
words_, _and sees to whom they are addressed_.  _He grows deadly pale_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Your house!  A house bought with the price of dishonour.
A house, everything in which has been paid for by fraud.  [_Turns round
and sees_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Ask him what the origin of his fortune
is!  Get him to tell you how he sold to a stockbroker a Cabinet secret.
Learn from him to what you owe your position.

LADY CHILTERN.  It is not true!  Robert!  It is not true!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Pointing at him with outstretched finger_.]  Look at
him!  Can he deny it?  Does he dare to?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Go!  Go at once.  You have done your worst now.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  My worst?  I have not yet finished with you, with either
of you.  I give you both till to-morrow at noon.  If by then you don’t do
what I bid you to do, the whole world shall know the origin of Robert
Chiltern.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _strikes the bell_.  _Enter_ MASON.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Show Mrs. Cheveley out.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _starts_; _then bows with somewhat exaggerated politeness
to_ LADY CHILTERN, _who makes no sign of response_.  _As she passes by_
SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _who is standing close to the door_, _she pauses for
a moment and looks him straight in the face_.  _She then goes out_,
_followed by the servant_, _who closes the door after him_.  _The husband
and wife are left alone_.  LADY CHILTERN _stands like some one in a
dreadful dream_.  _Then she turns round and looks at her husband_.  _She
looks at him with strange eyes_, _as though she were seeing him for the
first time_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  You sold a Cabinet secret for money!  You began your life
with fraud!  You built up your career on dishonour!  Oh, tell me it is
not true!  Lie to me!  Lie to me!  Tell me it is not true!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What this woman said is quite true.  But, Gertrude,
listen to me.  You don’t realise how I was tempted.  Let me tell you the
whole thing. [_Goes towards her_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Don’t come near me.  Don’t touch me.  I feel as if you
had soiled me for ever.  Oh! what a mask you have been wearing all these
years!  A horrible painted mask!  You sold yourself for money.  Oh! a
common thief were better.  You put yourself up to sale to the highest
bidder!  You were bought in the market.  You lied to the whole world.
And yet you will not lie to me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushing towards her_.]  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Thrusting him back with outstretched hands_.]  No,
don’t speak!  Say nothing!  Your voice wakes terrible memories—memories
of things that made me love you—memories of words that made me love
you—memories that now are horrible to me.  And how I worshipped you!  You
were to me something apart from common life, a thing pure, noble, honest,
without stain.  The world seemed to me finer because you were in it, and
goodness more real because you lived.  And now—oh, when I think that I
made of a man like you my ideal! the ideal of my life!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There was your mistake.  There was your error.  The
error all women commit.  Why can’t you women love us, faults and all?
Why do you place us on monstrous pedestals?  We have all feet of clay,
women as well as men; but when we men love women, we love them knowing
their weaknesses, their follies, their imperfections, love them all the
more, it may be, for that reason.  It is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love.  It is when we are wounded by our own
hands, or by the hands of others, that love should come to cure us—else
what use is love at all?  All sins, except a sin against itself, Love
should forgive.  All lives, save loveless lives, true Love should pardon.
A man’s love is like that.  It is wider, larger, more human than a
woman’s.  Women think that they are making ideals of men.  What they are
making of us are false idols merely.  You made your false idol of me, and
I had not the courage to come down, show you my wounds, tell you my
weaknesses.  I was afraid that I might lose your love, as I have lost it
now.  And so, last night you ruined my life for me—yes, ruined it!  What
this woman asked of me was nothing compared to what she offered to me.
She offered security, peace, stability.  The sin of my youth, that I had
thought was buried, rose up in front of me, hideous, horrible, with its
hands at my throat.  I could have killed it for ever, sent it back into
its tomb, destroyed its record, burned the one witness against me.  You
prevented me.  No one but you, you know it.  And now what is there before
me but public disgrace, ruin, terrible shame, the mockery of the world, a
lonely dishonoured life, a lonely dishonoured death, it may be, some day?
Let women make no more ideals of men! let them not put them on alters and
bow before them, or they may ruin other lives as completely as you—you
whom I have so wildly loved—have ruined mine!

[_He passes from the room_.  LADY CHILTERN _rushes towards him_, _but the
door is closed when she reaches it_.  _Pale with anguish_, _bewildered_,
_helpless_, _she sways like a plant in the water_.  _Her hands_,
_outstretched_, _seem to tremble in the air like blossoms in the mind_.
_Then she flings herself down beside a sofa and buries her face_.  _Her
sobs are like the sobs of a child_.]

                                 ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


_The Library in Lord Goring’s house_.  _An Adam room_.  _On the right is
the door leading into the hall_.  _On the left_, _the door of the
smoking-room_.  _A pair of folding doors at the back open into the
drawing-room_.  _The fire is lit_.  _Phipps_, _the butler_, _is arranging
some newspapers on the writing-table_.  _The distinction of Phipps is his
impassivity_. _He has been termed by enthusiasts the Ideal Butler_.  _The
Sphinx is not so incommunicable_.  _He is a mask with a manner_.  _Of his
intellectual or emotional life_, _history knows nothing_.  _He represents
the dominance of form_.

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _in evening dress with a buttonhole_.  _He is
wearing a silk hat and Inverness cape_.  _White-gloved_, _he carries a
Louis Seize cane_.  _His are all the delicate fopperies of Fashion_.
_One sees that he stands in immediate relation to modern life_, _makes it
indeed_, _and so masters it_.  _He is the first well-dressed philosopher
in the history of thought_.]

LORD GORING.  Got my second buttonhole for me, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Takes his hat_, _cane_, _and cape_, _and
presents new buttonhole on salver_.]

LORD GORING.  Rather distinguished thing, Phipps.  I am the only person
of the smallest importance in London at present who wears a buttonhole.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  I have observed that,

LORD GORING.  [_Taking out old buttonhole_.]  You see, Phipps, Fashion is
what one wears oneself.  What is unfashionable is what other people wear.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Just as vulgarity is simply the conduct of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Putting in a new buttonhole_.]  And falsehoods the truths
of other people.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Other people are quite dreadful.  The only possible society
is oneself.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong romance,
Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  [_Looking at himself in the glass_.]  Don’t think I quite
like this buttonhole, Phipps.  Makes me look a little too old.  Makes me
almost in the prime of life, eh, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  I don’t observe any alteration in your lordship’s appearance.

LORD GORING.  You don’t, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  No, my lord.

LORD GORING.  I am not quite sure.  For the future a more trivial
buttonhole, Phipps, on Thursday evenings.

PHIPPS.  I will speak to the florist, my lord.  She has had a loss in her
family lately, which perhaps accounts for the lack of triviality your
lordship complains of in the buttonhole.

LORD GORING.  Extraordinary thing about the lower classes in England—they
are always losing their relations.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord!  They are extremely fortunate in that respect.

LORD GORING.  [_Turns round and looks at him_.  PHIPPS _remains
impassive_.]  Hum!  Any letters, Phipps?

PHIPPS.  Three, my lord.  [_Hands letters on a salver_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Takes letters_.]  Want my cab round in twenty minutes.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Goes towards door_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Holds up letter in pink envelope_.]  Ahem!  Phipps, when
did this letter arrive?

PHIPPS.  It was brought by hand just after your lordship went to the
club.

LORD GORING.  That will do.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  Lady Chiltern’s
handwriting on Lady Chiltern’s pink notepaper.  That is rather curious.
I thought Robert was to write.  Wonder what Lady Chiltern has got to say
to me?  [_Sits at bureau and opens letter_, _and reads it_.]  ‘I want
you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  [_Puts down the
letter with a puzzled look_.  _Then takes it up_, _and reads it again
slowly_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.’  So she has
found out everything!  Poor woman!  Poor woman!  [ _Pulls out watch and
looks at it_.]  But what an hour to call!  Ten o’clock!  I shall have to
give up going to the Berkshires.  However, it is always nice to be
expected, and not to arrive.  I am not expected at the Bachelors’, so I
shall certainly go there.  Well, I will make her stand by her husband.
That is the only thing for her to do.  That is the only thing for any
woman to do.  It is the growth of the moral sense in women that makes
marriage such a hopeless, one-sided institution.  Ten o’clock.  She
should be here soon.  I must tell Phipps I am not in to any one else.
[_Goes towards bell_]

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

PHIPPS.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  Oh, why will parents always appear at the wrong time?  Some
extraordinary mistake in nature, I suppose.  [_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]
Delighted to see you, my dear father.  [_Goes to meet him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Take my cloak off.

LORD GORING.  Is it worth while, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Of course it is worth while, sir.  Which is the most
comfortable chair?

LORD GORING.  This one, father.  It is the chair I use myself, when I
have visitors.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Thank ye.  No draught, I hope, in this room?

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Sitting down_.]  Glad to hear it.  Can’t stand
draughts.  No draughts at home.

LORD GORING.  Good many breezes, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Eh?  Eh?  Don’t understand what you mean.  Want to have
a serious conversation with you, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father!  At this hour?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, it is only ten o’clock.  What is your
objection to the hour?  I think the hour is an admirable hour!

LORD GORING.  Well, the fact is, father, this is not my day for talking
seriously.  I am very sorry, but it is not my day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you mean, sir?

LORD GORING.  During the Season, father, I only talk seriously on the
first Tuesday in every month, from four to seven.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, make it Tuesday, sir, make it Tuesday.

LORD GORING.  But it is after seven, father, and my doctor says I must
not have any serious conversation after seven.  It makes me talk in my
sleep.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Talk in your sleep, sir?  What does that matter?  You
are not married.

LORD GORING.  No, father, I am not married.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hum!  That is what I have come to talk to you about,
sir.  You have got to get married, and at once.  Why, when I was your
age, sir, I had been an inconsolable widower for three months, and was
already paying my addresses to your admirable mother.  Damme, sir, it is
your duty to get married.  You can’t be always living for pleasure.
Every man of position is married nowadays.  Bachelors are not fashionable
any more.  They are a damaged lot.  Too much is known about them.  You
must get a wife, sir.  Look where your friend Robert Chiltern has got to
by probity, hard work, and a sensible marriage with a good woman.  Why
don’t you imitate him, sir?  Why don’t you take him for your model?

LORD GORING.  I think I shall, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would, sir.  Then I should be happy.  At
present I make your mother’s life miserable on your account.  You are
heartless, sir, quite heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And it is high time for you to get married.  You are
thirty-four years of age, sir.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, but I only admit to thirty-two—thirty-one and
a half when I have a really good buttonhole.  This buttonhole is not . . .
trivial enough.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I tell you you are thirty-four, sir.  And there is a
draught in your room, besides, which makes your conduct worse.  Why did
you tell me there was no draught, sir?  I feel a draught, sir, I feel it
distinctly.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  It is a dreadful draught.  I will come
and see you to-morrow, father.  We can talk over anything you like.  Let
me help you on with your cloak, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No, sir; I have called this evening for a definite
purpose, and I am going to see it through at all costs to my health or
yours.  Put down my cloak, sir.

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father.  But let us go into another room.
[_Rings bell_.]  There is a dreadful draught here.  [_Enter_ PHIPPS.]
Phipps, is there a good fire in the smoking-room?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Come in there, father.  Your sneezes are quite
heartrending.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, I suppose I have a right to sneeze when I
choose?

LORD GORING.  [_Apologetically_.]  Quite so, father.  I was merely
expressing sympathy.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Oh, damn sympathy.  There is a great deal too much of
that sort of thing going on nowadays.

LORD GORING.  I quite agree with you, father.  If there was less sympathy
in the world there would be less trouble in the world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Going towards the smoking-room_.]  That is a paradox,
sir.  I hate paradoxes.

LORD GORING.  So do I, father.  Everybody one meets is a paradox
nowadays.  It is a great bore.  It makes society so obvious.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Turning round_, _and looking at his son beneath his
bushy eyebrows_.]  Do you always really understand what you say, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Yes, father, if I listen
attentively.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Indignantly_.]  If you listen attentively! . . .
Conceited young puppy!

[_Goes off grumbling into the smoking-room_.  PHIPPS _enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Phipps, there is a lady coming to see me this evening on
particular business.  Show her into the drawing-room when she arrives.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  It is a matter of the gravest importance, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.

LORD GORING.  No one else is to be admitted, under any circumstances.

PHIPPS.  I understand, my lord.  [_Bell rings_.]

LORD GORING.  Ah! that is probably the lady.  I shall see her myself.

[_Just as he is going towards the door_ LORD CAVERSHAM _enters from the
smoking-room_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir? am I to wait attendance on you?

LORD GORING.  [_Considerably perplexed_.]  In a moment, father.  Do
excuse me.  [LORD CAVERSHAM _goes back_.]  Well, remember my
instructions, Phipps—into that room.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

[LORD GORING _goes into the smoking-room_.  HAROLD, _the footman shows_
MRS. CHEVELEY _in_.  _Lamia-like_, _she is in green and silver_.  _She
has a cloak of black satin_, _lined with dead rose-leaf silk_.]

HAROLD.  What name, madam?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To_ PHIPPS, _who advances towards her_.]  Is Lord
Goring not here?  I was told he was at home?

PHIPPS.  His lordship is engaged at present with Lord Caversham, madam.

[_Turns a cold_, _glassy eye on_ HAROLD, _who at once retires_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  How very filial!

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me to ask you, madam, to be kind enough to
wait in the drawing-room for him.  His lordship will come to you there.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a look of surprise_.]  Lord Goring expects me?

PHIPPS.  Yes, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Are you quite sure?

PHIPPS.  His lordship told me that if a lady called I was to ask her to
wait in the drawing-room.  [_Goes to the door of the drawing-room and
opens it_.]  His lordship’s directions on the subject were very precise.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_]  How thoughtful of him!  To expect the
unexpected shows a thoroughly modern intellect.  [_Goes towards the
drawing-room and looks in_.]  Ugh!  How dreary a bachelor’s drawing-room
always looks.  I shall have to alter all this.  [PHIPPS _brings the lamp
from the writing-table_.]  No, I don’t care for that lamp.  It is far too
glaring.  Light some candles.

PHIPPS.  [_Replaces lamp_.]  Certainly, madam.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I hope the candles have very becoming shades.

PHIPPS.  We have had no complaints about them, madam, as yet.

[_Passes into the drawing-room and begins to light the candles_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_To herself_.]  I wonder what woman he is waiting for
to-night.  It will be delightful to catch him.  Men always look so silly
when they are caught.  And they are always being caught.  [_Looks about
room and approaches the writing-table_.]  What a very interesting room!
What a very interesting picture!  Wonder what his correspondence is like.
[_Takes up letters_.]  Oh, what a very uninteresting correspondence!
Bills and cards, debts and dowagers!  Who on earth writes to him on pink
paper?  How silly to write on pink paper!  It looks like the beginning of
a middle-class romance.  Romance should never begin with sentiment.  It
should begin with science and end with a settlement.  [_Puts letter
down_, _then takes it up again_.]  I know that handwriting.  That is
Gertrude Chiltern’s.  I remember it perfectly.  The ten commandments in
every stroke of the pen, and the moral law all over the page.  Wonder
what Gertrude is writing to him about?  Something horrid about me, I
suppose.  How I detest that woman!  [_Reads it_.]  ‘I trust you.  I want
you.  I am coming to you.  Gertrude.’  ‘I trust you.  I want you.  I am
coming to you.’

[_A look of triumph comes over her face_.  _She is just about to steal
the letter_, _when_ PHIPPS _comes in_.]

PHIPPS.  The candles in the drawing-room are lit, madam, as you directed.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  [_Rises hastily and slips the letter under a
large silver-cased blotting-book that is lying on the table_.]

PHIPPS.  I trust the shades will be to your liking, madam.  They are the
most becoming we have.  They are the same as his lordship uses himself
when he is dressing for dinner.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a smile_.]  Then I am sure they will be perfectly
right.

PHIPPS.  [_Gravely_.]  Thank you, madam.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _goes into the drawing-room_.  PHIPPS _closes the door and
retires_.  _The door is then slowly opened_, _and_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes
out and creeps stealthily towards the writing-table_.  _Suddenly voices
are heard from the smoking-room_.  MRS. CHEVELEY _grows pale_, _and
stops_.  _The voices grow louder_, _and she goes back into the
drawing-room_, _biting her lip_.]

[_Enter_ LORD GORING _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD GORING.  [_Expostulating_.]  My dear father, if I am to get married,
surely you will allow me to choose the time, place, and person?
Particularly the person.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  That is a matter for me, sir.  You would
probably make a very poor choice.  It is I who should be consulted, not
you.  There is property at stake.  It is not a matter for affection.
Affection comes later on in married life.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  In married life affection comes when people
thoroughly dislike each other, father, doesn’t it?  [_Puts on_ LORD
CAVERSHAM’S _cloak for him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, sir.  I mean certainly not, air.  You are
talking very foolishly to-night.  What I say is that marriage is a matter
for common sense.

LORD GORING.  But women who have common sense are so curiously plain,
father, aren’t they?  Of course I only speak from hearsay.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  No woman, plain or pretty, has any common sense at all,
sir.  Common sense is the privilege of our sex.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  And we men are so self-sacrificing that we never
use it, do we, father?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I use it, sir.  I use nothing else.

LORD GORING.  So my mother tells me.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  It is the secret of your mother’s happiness.  You are
very heartless, sir, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  I hope not, father.

[_Goes out for a moment_.  _Then returns_, _looking rather put out_,
_with_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My dear Arthur, what a piece of good luck meeting
you on the doorstep!  Your servant had just told me you were not at home.
How extraordinary!

LORD GORING.  The fact is, I am horribly busy to-night, Robert, and I
gave orders I was not at home to any one.  Even my father had a
comparatively cold reception.  He complained of a draught the whole time.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! you must be at home to me, Arthur.  You are my
best friend.  Perhaps by to-morrow you will be my only friend.  My wife
has discovered everything.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I guessed as much!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him_.]  Really!  How?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Oh, merely by something in the
expression of your face as you came in.  Who told her?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Mrs. Cheveley herself.  And the woman I love knows
that I began my career with an act of low dishonesty, that I built up my
life upon sands of shame—that I sold, like a common huckster, the secret
that had been intrusted to me as a man of honour.  I thank heaven poor
Lord Radley died without knowing that I betrayed him.  I would to God I
had died before I had been so horribly tempted, or had fallen so low.
[_Burying his face in his hands_.]

LORD GORING.  [_After a pause_.]  You have heard nothing from Vienna yet,
in answer to your wire?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Looking up_.]  Yes; I got a telegram from the
first secretary at eight o’clock to-night.

LORD GORING.  Well?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Nothing is absolutely known against her.  On the
contrary, she occupies a rather high position in society.  It is a sort
of open secret that Baron Arnheim left her the greater portion of his
immense fortune.  Beyond that I can learn nothing.

LORD GORING.  She doesn’t turn out to be a spy, then?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Oh! spies are of no use nowadays.  Their profession
is over.  The newspapers do their work instead.

LORD GORING.  And thunderingly well they do it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, I am parched with thirst.  May I ring for
something?  Some hock and seltzer?

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  Let me.  [_Rings the bell_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thanks!  I don’t know what to do, Arthur, I don’t
know what to do, and you are my only friend.  But what a friend you
are—the one friend I can trust.  I can trust you absolutely, can’t I?

[_Enter_ PHIPPS.]

LORD GORING.  My dear Robert, of course.  Oh!  [_To_ PHIPPS.]  Bring some
hock and seltzer.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  And Phipps!

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Will you excuse me for a moment, Robert?  I want to give
some directions to my servant.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Certainly.

LORD GORING.  When that lady calls, tell her that I am not expected home
this evening.  Tell her that I have been suddenly called out of town.
You understand?

PHIPPS.  The lady is in that room, my lord.  You told me to show her into
that room, my lord.

LORD GORING.  You did perfectly right.  [_Exit_ PHIPPS.]  What a mess I
am in.  No; I think I shall get through it.  I’ll give her a lecture
through the door.  Awkward thing to manage, though.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, tell me what I should do.  My life seems to
have crumbled about me.  I am a ship without a rudder in a night without
a star.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you love your wife, don’t you?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I love her more than anything in the world.  I used
to think ambition the great thing.  It is not.  Love is the great thing
in the world.  There is nothing but love, and I love her.  But I am
defamed in her eyes.  I am ignoble in her eyes.  There is a wide gulf
between us now.  She has found me out, Arthur, she has found me out.

LORD GORING.  Has she never in her life done some folly—some
indiscretion—that she should not forgive your sin?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My wife!  Never!  She does not know what weakness
or temptation is.  I am of clay like other men.  She stands apart as good
women do—pitiless in her perfection—cold and stern and without mercy.
But I love her, Arthur.  We are childless, and I have no one else to
love, no one else to love me.  Perhaps if God had sent us children she
might have been kinder to me.  But God has given us a lonely house.  And
she has cut my heart in two.  Don’t let us talk of it.  I was brutal to
her this evening.  But I suppose when sinners talk to saints they are
brutal always.  I said to her things that were hideously true, on my
side, from my stand-point, from the standpoint of men.  But don’t let us
talk of that.

LORD GORING.  Your wife will forgive you.  Perhaps at this moment she is
forgiving you.  She loves you, Robert.  Why should she not forgive?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  God grant it!  God grant it!  [_Buries his face in
his hands_.]  But there is something more I have to tell you, Arthur.

[_Enter_ PHIPPS _with drinks_.]

PHIPPS.  [_Hands hock and seltzer to_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  Hock and
seltzer, sir.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Thank you.

LORD GORING.  Is your carriage here, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  No; I walked from the club.

LORD GORING.  Sir Robert will take my cab, Phipps.

PHIPPS.  Yes, my lord.  [_Exit_.]

LORD GORING.  Robert, you don’t mind my sending you away?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur, you must let me stay for five minutes.  I
have made up my mind what I am going to do to-night in the House.  The
debate on the Argentine Canal is to begin at eleven.  [_A chair falls in
the drawing-room_.]  What is that?

LORD GORING.  Nothing.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I heard a chair fall in the next room.  Some one
has been listening.

LORD GORING.  No, no; there is no one there.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  There is some one.  There are lights in the room,
and the door is ajar.  Some one has been listening to every secret of my
life.  Arthur, what does this mean?

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are excited, unnerved.  I tell you there is no
one in that room. Sit down, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Do you give me your word that there is no one
there?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Your word of honour?  [_Sits down_.]

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rises_.]  Arthur, let me see for myself.

LORD GORING.  No, no.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  If there is no one there why should I not look in
that room?  Arthur, you must let me go into that room and satisfy myself.
Let me know that no eavesdropper has heard my life’s secret.  Arthur, you
don’t realise what I am going through.

LORD GORING.  Robert, this must stop.  I have told you that there is no
one in that room—that is enough.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Rushes to the door of the room_.]  It is not
enough.  I insist on going into this room.  You have told me there is no
one there, so what reason can you have for refusing me?

LORD GORING.  For God’s sake, don’t!  There is some one there.  Some one
whom you must not see.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah, I thought so!

LORD GORING.  I forbid you to enter that room.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Stand back.  My life is at stake.  And I don’t care
who is there.  I will know who it is to whom I have told my secret and my
shame.  [_Enters room_.]

LORD GORING.  Great heavens! his own wife!

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _comes back_, _with a look of scorn and anger on his
face_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What explanation have you to give me for the
presence of that woman here?

LORD GORING.  Robert, I swear to you on my honour that that lady is
stainless and guiltless of all offence towards you.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  She is a vile, an infamous thing!

LORD GORING.  Don’t say that, Robert!  It was for your sake she came
here.  It was to try and save you she came here.  She loves you and no
one else.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You are mad.  What have I to do with her intrigues
with you?  Let her remain your mistress!  You are well suited to each
other.  She, corrupt and shameful—you, false as a friend, treacherous as
an enemy even—

LORD GORING.  It is not true, Robert.  Before heaven, it is not true.  In
her presence and in yours I will explain all.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Let me pass, sir.  You have lied enough upon your
word of honour.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _goes out_.  LORD GORING _rushes to the door of the
drawing-room_, _when_ MRS. CHEVELEY _comes out_, _looking radiant and
much amused_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a mock curtsey_]  Good evening, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley!  Great heavens! . . . May I ask what you
were doing in my drawing-room?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Merely listening.  I have a perfect passion for listening
through keyholes.  One always hears such wonderful things through them.

LORD GORING.  Doesn’t that sound rather like tempting Providence?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! surely Providence can resist temptation by this time.
[_Makes a sign to him to take her cloak off_, _which he does_.]

LORD GORING.  I am glad you have called.  I am going to give you some
good advice.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Oh! pray don’t.  One should never give a woman anything
that she can’t wear in the evening.

LORD GORING.  I see you are quite as wilful as you used to be.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Far more!  I have greatly improved.  I have had more
experience.

LORD GORING.  Too much experience is a dangerous thing.  Pray have a
cigarette.  Half the pretty women in London smoke cigarettes.  Personally
I prefer the other half.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I never smoke.  My dressmaker wouldn’t like it,
and a woman’s first duty in life is to her dressmaker, isn’t it?  What
the second duty is, no one has as yet discovered.

LORD GORING.  You have come here to sell me Robert Chiltern’s letter,
haven’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  To offer it to you on conditions.  How did you guess
that?

LORD GORING.  Because you haven’t mentioned the subject.  Have you got it
with you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Sitting down_.]  Oh, no!  A well-made dress has no
pockets.

LORD GORING.  What is your price for it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How absurdly English you are!  The English think that a
cheque-book can solve every problem in life.  Why, my dear Arthur, I have
very much more money than you have, and quite as much as Robert Chiltern
has got hold of.  Money is not what I want.

LORD GORING.  What do you want then, Mrs. Cheveley?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Why don’t you call me Laura?

LORD GORING.  I don’t like the name.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You used to adore it.

LORD GORING.  Yes: that’s why.  [MRS. CHEVELEY _motions to him to sit
down beside her_.  _He smiles_, _and does so_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you loved me once.

LORD GORING.  Yes.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you asked me to be your wife.

LORD GORING.  That was the natural result of my loving you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  And you threw me over because you saw, or said you saw,
poor old Lord Mortlake trying to have a violent flirtation with me in the
conservatory at Tenby.

LORD GORING.  I am under the impression that my lawyer settled that
matter with you on certain terms . . . dictated by yourself.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  At that time I was poor; you were rich.

LORD GORING.  Quite so.  That is why you pretended to love me.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Poor old Lord Mortlake, who
had only two topics of conversation, his gout and his wife!  I never
could quite make out which of the two he was talking about.  He used the
most horrible language about them both.  Well, you were silly, Arthur.
Why, Lord Mortlake was never anything more to me than an amusement.  One
of those utterly tedious amusements one only finds at an English country
house on an English country Sunday.  I don’t think any one at all morally
responsible for what he or she does at an English country house.

LORD GORING.  Yes.  I know lots of people think that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I loved you, Arthur.

LORD GORING.  My dear Mrs. Cheveley, you have always been far too clever
to know anything about love.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I did love you.  And you loved me.  You know you loved
me; and love is a very wonderful thing.  I suppose that when a man has
once loved a woman, he will do anything for her, except continue to love
her?  [_Puts her hand on his_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his hand away quietly_.]  Yes: except that.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  I am tired of living abroad.  I want
to come back to London.  I want to have a charming house here.  I want to
have a salon.  If one could only teach the English how to talk, and the
Irish how to listen, society here would be quite civilised.  Besides, I
have arrived at the romantic stage.  When I saw you last night at the
Chilterns’, I knew you were the only person I had ever cared for, if I
ever have cared for anybody, Arthur.  And so, on the morning of the day
you marry me, I will give you Robert Chiltern’s letter.  That is my
offer.  I will give it to you now, if you promise to marry me.

LORD GORING.  Now?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Smiling_.]  To-morrow.

LORD GORING.  Are you really serious?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes, quite serious.

LORD GORING.  I should make you a very bad husband.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I don’t mind bad husbands.  I have had two.  They amused
me immensely.

LORD GORING.  You mean that you amused yourself immensely, don’t you?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What do you know about my married life?

LORD GORING.  Nothing: but I can read it like a book.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  What book?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  The Book of Numbers.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Do you think it is quite charming of you to be so rude to
a woman in your own house?

LORD GORING.  In the case of very fascinating women, sex is a challenge,
not a defence.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I suppose that is meant for a compliment.  My dear
Arthur, women are never disarmed by compliments.  Men always are.  That
is the difference between the two sexes.

LORD GORING.  Women are never disarmed by anything, as far as I know
them.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Then you are going to allow your
greatest friend, Robert Chiltern, to be ruined, rather than marry some
one who really has considerable attractions left.  I thought you would
have risen to some great height of self-sacrifice, Arthur.  I think you
should.  And the rest of your life you could spend in contemplating your
own perfections.

LORD GORING.  Oh! I do that as it is.  And self-sacrifice is a thing that
should be put down by law.  It is so demoralising to the people for whom
one sacrifices oneself.  They always go to the bad.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  As if anything could demoralise Robert Chiltern!  You
seem to forget that I know his real character.

LORD GORING.  What you know about him is not his real character.  It was
an act of folly done in his youth, dishonourable, I admit, shameful, I
admit, unworthy of him, I admit, and therefore . . . not his true
character.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  How you men stand up for each other!

LORD GORING.  How you women war against each other!

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Bitterly_.]  I only war against one woman, against
Gertrude Chiltern.  I hate her.  I hate her now more than ever.

LORD GORING.  Because you have brought a real tragedy into her life, I
suppose.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a sneer_.]  Oh, there is only one real tragedy in
a woman’s life.  The fact that her past is always her lover, and her
future invariably her husband.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern knows nothing of the kind of life to which
you are alluding.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  A woman whose size in gloves is seven and three-quarters
never knows much about anything.  You know Gertrude has always worn seven
and three-quarters?  That is one of the reasons why there was never any
moral sympathy between us. . . . Well, Arthur, I suppose this romantic
interview may be regarded as at an end.  You admit it was romantic, don’t
you?  For the privilege of being your wife I was ready to surrender a
great prize, the climax of my diplomatic career.  You decline.  Very
well.  If Sir Robert doesn’t uphold my Argentine scheme, I expose him.
Voilà tout.

LORD GORING.  You mustn’t do that.  It would be vile, horrible, infamous.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Oh! don’t use big words.
They mean so little.  It is a commercial transaction.  That is all.
There is no good mixing up sentimentality in it.  I offered to sell
Robert Chiltern a certain thing.  If he won’t pay me my price, he will
have to pay the world a greater price.  There is no more to be said.  I
must go.  Good-bye.  Won’t you shake hands?

LORD GORING.  With you?  No.  Your transaction with Robert Chiltern may
pass as a loathsome commercial transaction of a loathsome commercial age;
but you seem to have forgotten that you came here to-night to talk of
love, you whose lips desecrated the word love, you to whom the thing is a
book closely sealed, went this afternoon to the house of one of the most
noble and gentle women in the world to degrade her husband in her eyes,
to try and kill her love for him, to put poison in her heart, and
bitterness in her life, to break her idol, and, it may be, spoil her
soul.  That I cannot forgive you.  That was horrible.  For that there can
be no forgiveness.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Arthur, you are unjust to me.  Believe me, you are quite
unjust to me.  I didn’t go to taunt Gertrude at all.  I had no idea of
doing anything of the kind when I entered.  I called with Lady Markby
simply to ask whether an ornament, a jewel, that I lost somewhere last
night, had been found at the Chilterns’.  If you don’t believe me, you
can ask Lady Markby.  She will tell you it is true.  The scene that
occurred happened after Lady Markby had left, and was really forced on me
by Gertrude’s rudeness and sneers.  I called, oh!—a little out of malice
if you like—but really to ask if a diamond brooch of mine had been found.
That was the origin of the whole thing.

LORD GORING.  A diamond snake-brooch with a ruby?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  How do you know?

LORD GORING.  Because it is found.  In point of fact, I found it myself,
and stupidly forgot to tell the butler anything about it as I was
leaving.  [_Goes over to the writing-table and pulls out the drawers_.]
It is in this drawer.  No, that one.  This is the brooch, isn’t it?
[_Holds up the brooch_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I am so glad to get it back.  It was . . a present.

LORD GORING.  Won’t you wear it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Certainly, if you pin it in.  [LORD GORING _suddenly
clasps it on her arm_.]  Why do you put it on as a bracelet?  I never
knew it could he worn as a bracelet.

LORD GORING.  Really?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Holding out her handsome arm_.]  No; but it looks very
well on me as a bracelet, doesn’t it?

LORD GORING.  Yes; much better than when I saw it last.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  When did you see it last?

LORD GORING.  [_Calmly_.]  Oh, ten years ago, on Lady Berkshire, from
whom you stole it.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Starting_.]  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  I mean that you stole that ornament from my cousin, Mary
Berkshire, to whom I gave it when she was married.  Suspicion fell on a
wretched servant, who was sent away in disgrace.  I recognised it last
night.  I determined to say nothing about it till I had found the thief.
I have found the thief now, and I have heard her own confession.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Tossing her head_.]  It is not true.

LORD GORING.  You know it is true.  Why, thief is written across your
face at this moment.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I will deny the whole affair from beginning to end.  I
will say that I have never seen this wretched thing, that it was never in
my possession.

[MRS. CHEVELEY _tries to get the bracelet off her arm_, _but fails_.
LORD GORING _looks on amused_.  _Her thin fingers tear at the jewel to no
purpose_.  _A curse breaks from her_.]

LORD GORING.  The drawback of stealing a thing, Mrs. Cheveley, is that
one never knows how wonderful the thing that one steals is.  You can’t
get that bracelet off, unless you know where the spring is.  And I see
you don’t know where the spring is.  It is rather difficult to find.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  You brute!  You coward!  [_She tries again to unclasp the
bracelet_, _but fails_.]

LORD GORING.  Oh! don’t use big words.  They mean so little.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Again tears at the bracelet in a paroxysm of rage_,
_with inarticulate sounds_.  _Then stops_, _and looks at_ LORD GORING.]
What are you going to do?

LORD GORING.  I am going to ring for my servant.  He is an admirable
servant.  Always comes in the moment one rings for him.  When he comes I
will tell him to fetch the police.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Trembling_.]  The police?  What for?

LORD GORING.  To-morrow the Berkshires will prosecute you.  That is what
the police are for.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Is now in an agony of physical terror_.  _Her face is
distorted_.  _Her mouth awry_.  _A mask has fallen from her_.  _She it_,
_for the moment_, _dreadful to look at_.]  Don’t do that.  I will do
anything you want.  Anything in the world you want.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Stop! Stop!  Let me have time to think.

LORD GORING.  Give me Robert Chiltern’s letter.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I have not got it with me.  I will give it to you
to-morrow.

LORD GORING.  You know you are lying.  Give it to me at once.  [MRS.
CHEVELEY _pulls the letter out_, _and hands it to him_.  _She is horribly
pale_.]  This is it?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_In a hoarse voice_.]  Yes.

LORD GORING.  [_Takes the letter_, _examines it_, _sighs_, _and burns it
with the lamp_.]  For so well-dressed a woman, Mrs. Cheveley, you have
moments of admirable common sense.  I congratulate you.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Catches sight of_ LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_, _the cover
of which is just showing from under the blotting-book_.]  Please get me a
glass of water.

LORD GORING.  Certainly.  [_Goes to the corner of the room and pours out
a glass of water_.  _While his back is turned_ MRS. CHEVELEY _steals_
LADY CHILTERN’S _letter_.  _When_ LORD GORING _returns the glass she
refuses it with a gesture_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thank you.  Will you help me on with my cloak?

LORD GORING.  With pleasure.  [_Puts her cloak on_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Thanks.  I am never going to try to harm Robert Chiltern
again.

LORD GORING.  Fortunately you have not the chance, Mrs. Cheveley.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Well, if even I had the chance, I wouldn’t.  On the
contrary, I am going to render him a great service.

LORD GORING.  I am charmed to hear it.  It is a reformation.

MRS. CHEVELEY.  Yes.  I can’t bear so upright a gentleman, so honourable
an English gentleman, being so shamefully deceived, and so—

LORD GORING.  Well?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  I find that somehow Gertrude Chiltern’s dying speech and
confession has strayed into my pocket.

LORD GORING.  What do you mean?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_With a bitter note of triumph in her voice_.]  I mean
that I am going to send Robert Chiltern the love-letter his wife wrote to
you to-night.

LORD GORING.  Love-letter?

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_Laughing_.]  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to
you.  Gertrude.’

[LORD GORING _rushes to the bureau and takes up the envelope_, _finds is
empty_, _and turns round_.]

LORD GORING.  You wretched woman, must you always be thieving?  Give me
back that letter.  I’ll take it from you by force.  You shall not leave
my room till I have got it.

[_He rushes towards her_, _but_ MRS. CHEVELEY _at once puts her hand on
the electric bell that is on the table_. _The bell sounds with shrill
reverberations_, _and_ PHIPPS _enters_.]

MRS. CHEVELEY.  [_After a pause_.]  Lord Goring merely rang that you
should show me out.  Good-night, Lord Goring!

[_Goes out followed by_ PHIPPS.  _Her face it illumined with evil
triumph_.  _There is joy in her eyes_.  _Youth seems to have come back to
her_.  _Her last glance is like a swift arrow_.  LORD GORING _bites his
lip_, _and lights his a cigarette_.]

                                ACT DROPS




FOURTH ACT


SCENE


_Same as Act II_.

[LORD GORING _is standing by the fireplace with his hands in his
pockets_.  _He is looking rather bored_.]

LORD GORING.  [_Pulls out his watch_, _inspects it_, _and rings the
bell_.]  It is a great nuisance.  I can’t find any one in this house to
talk to.  And I am full of interesting information.  I feel like the
latest edition of something or other.

[_Enter servant_.]

JAMES.  Sir Robert is still at the Foreign Office, my lord.

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern not down yet?

JAMES.  Her ladyship has not yet left her room.  Miss Chiltern has just
come in from riding.

LORD GORING.  [_To himself_.]  Ah! that is something.

JAMES.  Lord Caversham has been waiting some time in the library for Sir
Robert.  I told him your lordship was here.

LORD GORING.  Thank you!  Would you kindly tell him I’ve gone?

JAMES.  [_Bowing_.]  I shall do so, my lord.

[_Exit servant_.]

LORD GORING.  Really, I don’t want to meet my father three days running.
It is a great deal too much excitement for any son.  I hope to goodness
he won’t come up.  Fathers should be neither seen nor heard.  That is the
only proper basis for family life.  Mothers are different.  Mothers are
darlings.  [_Throws himself down into a chair_, _picks up a paper and
begins to read it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Well, sir, what are you doing here?  Wasting your time
as usual, I suppose?

LORD GORING.  [_Throws down paper and rises_.]  My dear father, when one
pays a visit it is for the purpose of wasting other people’s time, not
one’s own.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Have you been thinking over what I spoke to you about
last night?

LORD GORING.  I have been thinking about nothing else.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Engaged to be married yet?

LORD GORING.  [_Genially_.]  Not yet: but I hope to be before lunch-time.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Caustically_.]  You can have till dinner-time if it
would be of any convenience to you.

LORD GORING.  Thanks awfully, but I think I’d sooner be engaged before
lunch.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Humph!  Never know when you are serious or not.

LORD GORING.  Neither do I, father.

[_A pause_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I suppose you have read _The Times_ this morning?

LORD GORING.  [_Airily_.]  The Times?  Certainly not.  I only read _The
Morning Post_.  All that one should know about modern life is where the
Duchesses are; anything else is quite demoralising.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Do you mean to say you have not read _The Times_ leading
article on Robert Chiltern’s career?

LORD GORING.  Good heavens!  No.  What does it say?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What should it say, sir?  Everything complimentary, of
course.  Chiltern’s speech last night on this Argentine Canal scheme was
one of the finest pieces of oratory ever delivered in the House since
Canning.

LORD GORING.  Ah!  Never heard of Canning.  Never wanted to.  And did . . .
did Chiltern uphold the scheme?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Uphold it, sir?  How little you know him!  Why, he
denounced it roundly, and the whole system of modern political finance.
This speech is the turning-point in his career, as _The Times_ points
out.  You should read this article, sir.  [_Opens_ The Times.]  ‘Sir
Robert Chiltern . . . most rising of our young statesmen . . . Brilliant
Orator . . . Unblemished career . . . Well-known integrity of character
. . . Represents what is best in English public life . . . Noble contrast
to the lax morality so common among foreign politicians.’  They will
never say that of you, sir.

LORD GORING.  I sincerely hope not, father.  However, I am delighted at
what you tell me about Robert, thoroughly delighted.  It shows he has got
pluck.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He has got more than pluck, sir, he has got genius.

LORD GORING.  Ah! I prefer pluck.  It is not so common, nowadays, as
genius is.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I wish you would go into Parliament.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, only people who look dull ever get into the
House of Commons, and only people who are dull ever succeed there.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you try to do something useful in life?

LORD GORING.  I am far too young.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Testily_.]  I hate this affectation of youth, sir.  It
is a great deal too prevalent nowadays.

LORD GORING.  Youth isn’t an affectation.  Youth is an art.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Why don’t you propose to that pretty Miss Chiltern?

LORD GORING.  I am of a very nervous disposition, especially in the
morning.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I don’t suppose there is the smallest chance of her
accepting you.

LORD GORING.  I don’t know how the betting stands to-day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  If she did accept you she would be the prettiest fool in
England.

LORD GORING.  That is just what I should like to marry.  A thoroughly
sensible wife would reduce me to a condition of absolute idiocy in less
than six months.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You don’t deserve her, sir.

LORD GORING.  My dear father, if we men married the women we deserved, we
should have a very bad time of it.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! . . . How do you do, Lord Caversham?  I hope Lady
Caversham is quite well?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Caversham is as usual, as usual.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Taking no notice at all of_ LORD GORING, _and
addressing herself exclusively to_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  And Lady Caversham’s
bonnets . . . are they at all better?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  They have had a serious relapse, I am sorry to say.

LORD GORING.  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_To_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]  I hope an operation will not be
necessary.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Smiling at her pertness_.]  If it is, we shall have to
give Lady Caversham a narcotic.  Otherwise she would never consent to
have a feather touched.

LORD GORING.  [_With increased emphasis_.]  Good morning, Miss Mabel!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Turning round with feigned surprise_.]  Oh, are you
here?  Of course you understand that after your breaking your appointment
I am never going to speak to you again.

LORD GORING.  Oh, please don’t say such a thing.  You are the one person
in London I really like to have to listen to me.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I never believe a single word that either
you or I say to each other.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You are quite right, my dear, quite right . . . as far
as he is concerned, I mean.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you think you could possibly make your son behave a
little better occasionally?  Just as a change.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I regret to say, Miss Chiltern, that I have no influence
at all over my son.  I wish I had.  If I had, I know what I would make
him do.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am afraid that he has one of those terribly weak
natures that are not susceptible to influence.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  He is very heartless, very heartless.

LORD GORING.  It seems to me that I am a little in the way here.

MABEL CHILTERN.  It is very good for you to be in the way, and to know
what people say of you behind your back.

LORD GORING.  I don’t at all like knowing what people say of me behind my
back.  It makes me far too conceited.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  After that, my dear, I really must bid you good morning.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Oh! I hope you are not going to leave me all alone with
Lord Goring?  Especially at such an early hour in the day.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am afraid I can’t take him with me to Downing Street.
It is not the Prime Minster’s day for seeing the unemployed.

[_Shakes hands with_ MABEL CHILTERN, _takes up his hat and stick_, _and
goes out_, _with a parting glare of indignation at_ LORD GORING.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Takes up roses and begins to arrange them in a bowl on
the table_.]  People who don’t keep their appointments in the Park are
horrid.

LORD GORING.  Detestable.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am glad you admit it.  But I wish you wouldn’t look so
pleased about it.

LORD GORING.  I can’t help it.  I always look pleased when I am with you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  Then I suppose it is my duty to remain with
you?

LORD GORING.  Of course it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Well, my duty is a thing I never do, on principle.  It
always depresses me.  So I am afraid I must leave you.

LORD GORING.  Please don’t, Miss Mabel.  I have something very particular
to say to you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Rapturously_.]  Oh! is it a proposal?

LORD GORING.  [_Somewhat taken aback_.]  Well, yes, it is—I am bound to
say it is.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a sigh of pleasure_.]  I am so glad.  That makes
the second to-day.

LORD GORING.  [_Indignantly_.]  The second to-day?  What conceited ass
has been impertinent enough to dare to propose to you before I had
proposed to you?

MABEL CHILTERN.  Tommy Trafford, of course.  It is one of Tommy’s days
for proposing.  He always proposes on Tuesdays and Thursdays, during the
Season.

LORD GORING.  You didn’t accept him, I hope?

MABEL CHILTERN.  I make it a rule never to accept Tommy.  That is why he
goes on proposing.  Of course, as you didn’t turn up this morning, I very
nearly said yes.  It would have been an excellent lesson both for him and
for you if I had.  It would have taught you both better manners.

LORD GORING.  Oh! bother Tommy Trafford.  Tommy is a silly little ass.  I
love you.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I know.  And I think you might have mentioned it before.
I am sure I have given you heaps of opportunities.

LORD GORING.  Mabel, do be serious.  Please be serious.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Ah! that is the sort of thing a man always says to a
girl before he has been married to her.  He never says it afterwards.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking hold of her hand_.]  Mabel, I have told you that I
love you.  Can’t you love me a little in return?

MABEL CHILTERN.  You silly Arthur!  If you knew anything about . . .
anything, which you don’t, you would know that I adore you.  Every one in
London knows it except you.  It is a public scandal the way I adore you.
I have been going about for the last six months telling the whole of
society that I adore you.  I wonder you consent to have anything to say
to me.  I have no character left at all.  At least, I feel so happy that
I am quite sure I have no character left at all.

LORD GORING.  [_Catches her in his arms and kisses her_.  _Then there is
a pause of bliss_.]  Dear!  Do you know I was awfully afraid of being
refused!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Looking up at him_.]  But you never have been refused
yet by anybody, have you, Arthur?  I can’t imagine any one refusing you.

LORD GORING.  [_After kissing her again_.]  Of course I’m not nearly good
enough for you, Mabel.

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Nestling close to him_.]  I am so glad, darling.  I
was afraid you were.

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  And I’m . . . I’m a little over
thirty.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Dear, you look weeks younger than that.

LORD GORING.  [_Enthusiastically_.]  How sweet of you to say so! . . .
And it is only fair to tell you frankly that I am fearfully extravagant.

MABEL CHILTERN.  But so am I, Arthur.  So we’re sure to agree.  And now I
must go and see Gertrude.

LORD GORING.  Must you really?  [_Kisses her_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then do tell her I want to talk to her particularly.  I
have been waiting here all the morning to see either her or Robert.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Do you mean to say you didn’t come here expressly to
propose to me?

LORD GORING.  [_Triumphantly_.]  No; that was a flash of genius.

MABEL CHILTERN.  Your first.

LORD GORING.  [_With determination_.]  My last.

MABEL CHILTERN.  I am delighted to hear it.  Now don’t stir.  I’ll be
back in five minutes.  And don’t fall into any temptations while I am
away.

LORD GORING.  Dear Mabel, while you are away, there are none.  It makes
me horribly dependent on you.

[_Enter_ LADY CHILTERN.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, dear!  How pretty you are looking!

MABEL CHILTERN.  How pale you are looking, Gertrude!  It is most
becoming!

LADY CHILTERN.  Good morning, Lord Goring!

LORD GORING.  [_Bowing_.]  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_Aside to_ LORD GORING.]  I shall be in the
conservatory under the second palm tree on the left.

LORD GORING.  Second on the left?

MABEL CHILTERN.  [_With a look of mock surprise_.]  Yes; the usual palm
tree.

[_Blows a kiss to him_, _unobserved by_ LADY CHILTERN, _and goes out_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, I have a certain amount of very good news to
tell you.  Mrs. Cheveley gave me up Robert’s letter last night, and I
burned it.  Robert is safe.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Sinking on the sofa_.]  Safe!  Oh! I am so glad of
that.  What a good friend you are to him—to us!

LORD GORING.  There is only one person now that could be said to be in
any danger.

LADY CHILTERN.  Who is that?

LORD GORING.  [_Sitting down beside her_.]  Yourself.

LADY CHILTERN.  I?  In danger?  What do you mean?

LORD GORING.  Danger is too great a word.  It is a word I should not have
used.  But I admit I have something to tell you that may distress you,
that terribly distresses me.  Yesterday evening you wrote me a very
beautiful, womanly letter, asking me for my help.  You wrote to me as one
of your oldest friends, one of your husband’s oldest friends.  Mrs.
Cheveley stole that letter from my rooms.

LADY CHILTERN.  Well, what use is it to her?  Why should she not have it?

LORD GORING.  [_Rising_.]  Lady Chiltern, I will be quite frank with you.
Mrs. Cheveley puts a certain construction on that letter and proposes to
send it to your husband.

LADY CHILTERN.  But what construction could she put on it? . . . Oh! not
that! not that!  If I in—in trouble, and wanting your help, trusting you,
propose to come to you . . . that you may advise me . . . assist me . . .
Oh! are there women so horrible as that . . .?  And she proposes to send
it to my husband?  Tell me what happened.  Tell me all that happened.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley was concealed in a room adjoining my library,
without my knowledge.  I thought that the person who was waiting in that
room to see me was yourself.  Robert came in unexpectedly.  A chair or
something fell in the room.  He forced his way in, and he discovered her.
We had a terrible scene.  I still thought it was you.  He left me in
anger.  At the end of everything Mrs. Cheveley got possession of your
letter—she stole it, when or how, I don’t know.

LADY CHILTERN.  At what hour did this happen?

LORD GORING.  At half-past ten.  And now I propose that we tell Robert
the whole thing at once.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Looking at him with amazement that is almost terror_.]
You want me to tell Robert that the woman you expected was not Mrs.
Cheveley, but myself?  That it was I whom you thought was concealed in a
room in your house, at half-past ten o’clock at night?  You want me to
tell him that?

LORD GORING.  I think it is better that he should know the exact truth.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Rising_.]  Oh, I couldn’t, I couldn’t!

LORD GORING.  May I do it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.

LORD GORING.  [_Gravely_.]  You are wrong, Lady Chiltern.

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  The letter must be intercepted.  That is all.  But
how can I do it?  Letters arrive for him every moment of the day.  His
secretaries open them and hand them to him.  I dare not ask the servants
to bring me his letters.  It would be impossible.  Oh! why don’t you tell
me what to do?

LORD GORING.  Pray be calm, Lady Chiltern, and answer the questions I am
going to put to you.  You said his secretaries open his letters.

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Who is with him to-day?  Mr. Trafford, isn’t it?

LADY CHILTERN.  No.  Mr. Montford, I think.

LORD GORING.  You can trust him?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Oh! how do I know?

LORD GORING.  He would do what you asked him, wouldn’t he?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think so.

LORD GORING.  Your letter was on pink paper.  He could recognise it
without reading it, couldn’t he?  By the colour?

LADY CHILTERN.  I suppose so.

LORD GORING.  Is he in the house now?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

LORD GORING.  Then I will go and see him myself, and tell him that a
certain letter, written on pink paper, is to be forwarded to Robert
to-day, and that at all costs it must not reach him.  [_Goes to the
door_, _and opens it_.]  Oh! Robert is coming upstairs with the letter in
his hand.  It has reached him already.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_With a cry of pain_.]  Oh! you have saved his life;
what have you done with mine?

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He has the letter in his hand_, _and is
reading it_.  _He comes towards his wife_, _not noticing_ LORD GORING’S
_presence_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  ‘I want you.  I trust you.  I am coming to you.
Gertrude.’  Oh, my love!  Is this true?  Do you indeed trust me, and want
me?  If so, it was for me to come to you, not for you to write of coming
to me.  This letter of yours, Gertrude, makes me feel that nothing that
the world may do can hurt me now.  You want me, Gertrude?

[LORD GORING, _unseen by_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN, _makes an imploring sign
to_ LADY CHILTERN _to accept the situation and_ SIR ROBERT’S _error_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  You trust me, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Ah! why did you not add you loved me?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking his hand_.]  Because I loved you.

[LORD GORING _passes into the conservatory_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Kisses her_.]  Gertrude, you don’t know what I
feel.  When Montford passed me your letter across the table—he had opened
it by mistake, I suppose, without looking at the handwriting on the
envelope—and I read it—oh! I did not care what disgrace or punishment was
in store for me, I only thought you loved me still.

LADY CHILTERN.  There is no disgrace in store for you, nor any public
shame.  Mrs. Cheveley has handed over to Lord Goring the document that
was in her possession, and he has destroyed it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Are you sure of this, Gertrude?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; Lord Goring has just told me.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Then I am safe!  Oh! what a wonderful thing to be
safe!  For two days I have been in terror.  I am safe now.  How did
Arthur destroy my letter?  Tell me.

LADY CHILTERN.  He burned it.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I wish I had seen that one sin of my youth burning
to ashes.  How many men there are in modern life who would like to see
their past burning to white ashes before them!  Is Arthur still here?

LADY CHILTERN.  Yes; he is in the conservatory.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I am so glad now I made that speech last night in
the House, so glad.  I made it thinking that public disgrace might be the
result.  But it has not been so.

LADY CHILTERN.  Public honour has been the result.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I think so.  I fear so, almost.  For although I am
safe from detection, although every proof against me is destroyed, I
suppose, Gertrude . . . I suppose I should retire from public life?  [_He
looks anxiously at his wife_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Eagerly_.]  Oh yes, Robert, you should do that.  It is
your duty to do that.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  It is much to surrender.

LADY CHILTERN.  No; it will be much to gain.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _walks up and down the room with a troubled
expression_.  _Then comes over to his wife_, _and puts his hand on her
shoulder_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  And you would be happy living somewhere alone with
me, abroad perhaps, or in the country away from London, away from public
life?  You would have no regrets?

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh! none, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Sadly_.]  And your ambition for me?  You used to
be ambitious for me.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, my ambition!  I have none now, but that we two may
love each other.  It was your ambition that led you astray.  Let us not
talk about ambition.

[LORD GORING _returns from the conservatory_, _looking very pleased with
himself_, _and with an entirely new buttonhole that some one has made for
him_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Going towards him_.]  Arthur, I have to thank you
for what you have done for me.  I don’t know how I can repay you.
[_Shakes hands with him_.]

LORD GORING.  My dear fellow, I’ll tell you at once.  At the present
moment, under the usual palm tree . . . I mean in the conservatory . . .

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Lord Caversham.

LORD GORING.  That admirable father of mine really makes a habit of
turning up at the wrong moment.  It is very heartless of him, very
heartless indeed.

[_Enter_ LORD CAVERSHAM.  MASON _goes out_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Good morning, Lady Chiltern!  Warmest congratulations to
you, Chiltern, on your brilliant speech last night.  I have just left the
Prime Minister, and you are to have the vacant seat in the Cabinet.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a look of joy and triumph_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Yes; here is the Prime Minister’s letter.  [_Hands
letter_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Takes letter and reads it_.]  A seat in the
Cabinet!

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Certainly, and you well deserve it too.  You have got
what we want so much in political life nowadays—high character, high
moral tone, high principles.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Everything that you
have not got, sir, and never will have.

LORD GORING.  I don’t like principles, father.  I prefer prejudices.

[SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _is on the brink of accepting the Prime Minister’s
offer_, _when he sees wife looking at him with her clear_, _candid eyes_.
_He then realises that it is impossible_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I cannot accept this offer, Lord Caversham.  I have
made up my mind to decline it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Decline it, sir!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  My intention is to retire at once from public life.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Angrily_.]  Decline a seat in the Cabinet, and retire
from public life?  Never heard such damned nonsense in the whole course
of my existence.  I beg your pardon, Lady Chiltern.  Chiltern, I beg your
pardon.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Don’t grin like that, sir.

LORD GORING.  No, father.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Lady Chiltern, you are a sensible woman, the most
sensible woman in London, the most sensible woman I know.  Will you
kindly prevent your husband from making such a . . . from taking such
. . . Will you kindly do that, Lady Chiltern?

LADY CHILTERN.  I think my husband in right in his determination, Lord
Caversham.  I approve of it.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  You approve of it?  Good heavens!

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  I admire him for it.  I
admire him immensely for it.  I have never admired him so much before.
He is finer than even I thought him.  [_To_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]  You
will go and write your letter to the Prime Minister now, won’t you?
Don’t hesitate about it, Robert.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a touch of bitterness_.]  I suppose I had
better write it at once.  Such offers are not repeated.  I will ask you
to excuse me for a moment, Lord Caversham.

LADY CHILTERN.  I may come with you, Robert, may I not?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, Gertrude.

[LADY CHILTERN _goes out with him_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is the matter with this family?  Something wrong
here, eh?  [_Tapping his forehead_.]  Idiocy?  Hereditary, I suppose.
Both of them, too.  Wife as well as husband.  Very sad.  Very sad indeed!
And they are not an old family.  Can’t understand it.

LORD GORING.  It is not idiocy, father, I assure you.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What is it then, sir?

LORD GORING.  [_After some hesitation_.]  Well, it is what is called
nowadays a high moral tone, father.  That is all.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Hate these new-fangled names.  Same thing as we used to
call idiocy fifty years ago.  Shan’t stay in this house any longer.

LORD GORING.  [_Taking his arm_.]  Oh! just go in here for a moment,
father.  Third palm tree to the left, the usual palm tree.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What, sir?

LORD GORING.  I beg your pardon, father, I forgot.  The conservatory,
father, the conservatory—there is some one there I want you to talk to.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What about, sir?

LORD GORING.  About me, father,

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Grimly_.]  Not a subject on which much eloquence is
possible.

LORD GORING.  No, father; but the lady is like me.  She doesn’t care much
for eloquence in others.  She thinks it a little loud.

[LORD CAVERSHAM _goes out into the conservatory_.  LADY CHILTERN
_enters_.]

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern, why are you playing Mrs. Cheveley’s cards?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Startled_.]  I don’t understand you.

LORD GORING.  Mrs. Cheveley made an attempt to ruin your husband.  Either
to drive him from public life, or to make him adopt a dishonourable
position.  From the latter tragedy you saved him.  The former you are now
thrusting on him.  Why should you do him the wrong Mrs. Cheveley tried to
do and failed?

LADY CHILTERN.  Lord Goring?

LORD GORING.  [_Pulling himself together for a great effort_, _and
showing the philosopher that underlies the dandy_.]  Lady Chiltern, allow
me.  You wrote me a letter last night in which you said you trusted me
and wanted my help.  Now is the moment when you really want my help, now
is the time when you have got to trust me, to trust in my counsel and
judgment.  You love Robert.  Do you want to kill his love for you?  What
sort of existence will he have if you rob him of the fruits of his
ambition, if you take him from the splendour of a great political career,
if you close the doors of public life against him, if you condemn him to
sterile failure, he who was made for triumph and success?  Women are not
meant to judge us, but to forgive us when we need forgiveness.  Pardon,
not punishment, is their mission.  Why should you scourge him with rods
for a sin done in his youth, before he knew you, before he knew himself?
A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has larger issues,
wider scope, greater ambitions.  A woman’s life revolves in curves of
emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life progresses.
Don’t make any terrible mistake, Lady Chiltern.  A woman who can keep a
man’s love, and love him in return, has done all the world wants of
women, or should want of them.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Troubled and hesitating_.]  But it is my husband
himself who wishes to retire from public life.  He feels it is his duty.
It was he who first said so.

LORD GORING.  Rather than lose your love, Robert would do anything, wreck
his whole career, as he is on the brink of doing now.  He is making for
you a terrible sacrifice.  Take my advice, Lady Chiltern, and do not
accept a sacrifice so great.  If you do, you will live to repent it
bitterly.  We men and women are not made to accept such sacrifices from
each other.  We are not worthy of them.  Besides, Robert has been
punished enough.

LADY CHILTERN.  We have both been punished.  I set him up too high.

LORD GORING.  [_With deep feeling in his voice_.]  Do not for that reason
set him down now too low.  If he has fallen from his altar, do not thrust
him into the mire.  Failure to Robert would be the very mire of shame.
Power is his passion.  He would lose everything, even his power to feel
love.  Your husband’s life is at this moment in your hands, your
husband’s love is in your hands.  Don’t mar both for him.

[_Enter_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude, here is the draft of my letter.  Shall I
read it to you?

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me see it.

[SIR ROBERT _hands her the letter_.  _She reads it_, _and then_, _with a
gesture of passion_, _tears it up_.]

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What are you doing?

LADY CHILTERN.  A man’s life is of more value than a woman’s.  It has
larger issues, wider scope, greater ambitions.  Our lives revolve in
curves of emotions.  It is upon lines of intellect that a man’s life
progresses.  I have just learnt this, and much else with it, from Lord
Goring.  And I will not spoil your life for you, nor see you spoil it as
a sacrifice to me, a useless sacrifice!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Gertrude!  Gertrude!

LADY CHILTERN.  You can forget.  Men easily forget.  And I forgive.  That
is how women help the world.  I see that now.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Deeply overcome by emotion_, _embraces her_.]  My
wife! my wife!  [_To_ LORD GORING.]  Arthur, it seems that I am always to
be in your debt.

LORD GORING.  Oh dear no, Robert.  Your debt is to Lady Chiltern, not to
me!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  I owe you much.  And now tell me what you were
going to ask me just now as Lord Caversham came in.

LORD GORING.  Robert, you are your sister’s guardian, and I want your
consent to my marriage with her.  That is all.

LADY CHILTERN.  Oh, I am so glad!  I am so glad!  [_Shakes hands with_
LORD GORING.]

LORD GORING.  Thank you, Lady Chiltern.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_With a troubled look_.]  My sister to be your
wife?

LORD GORING.  Yes.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Speaking with great firmness_.]  Arthur, I am
very sorry, but the thing is quite out of the question.  I have to think
of Mabel’s future happiness.  And I don’t think her happiness would be
safe in your hands.  And I cannot have her sacrificed!

LORD GORING.  Sacrificed!

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Yes, utterly sacrificed.  Loveless marriages are
horrible.  But there is one thing worse than an absolutely loveless
marriage.  A marriage in which there is love, but on one side only;
faith, but on one side only; devotion, but on one side only, and in which
of the two hearts one is sure to be broken.

LORD GORING.  But I love Mabel.  No other woman has any place in my life.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, if they love each other, why should they not be
married?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Arthur cannot bring Mabel the love that she
deserves.

LORD GORING.  What reason have you for saying that?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_After a pause_.]  Do you really require me to
tell you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly I do.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  As you choose.  When I called on you yesterday
evening I found Mrs. Cheveley concealed in your rooms.  It was between
ten and eleven o’clock at night.  I do not wish to say anything more.
Your relations with Mrs. Cheveley have, as I said to you last night,
nothing whatsoever to do with me.  I know you were engaged to be married
to her once.  The fascination she exercised over you then seems to have
returned.  You spoke to me last night of her as of a woman pure and
stainless, a woman whom you respected and honoured.  That may be so.  But
I cannot give my sister’s life into your hands.  It would be wrong of me.
It would be unjust, infamously unjust to her.

LORD GORING.  I have nothing more to say.

LADY CHILTERN.  Robert, it was not Mrs. Cheveley whom Lord Goring
expected last night.

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  Not Mrs. Cheveley!  Who was it then?

LORD GORING.  Lady Chiltern!

LADY CHILTERN.  It was your own wife.  Robert, yesterday afternoon Lord
Goring told me that if ever I was in trouble I could come to him for
help, as he was our oldest and best friend.  Later on, after that
terrible scene in this room, I wrote to him telling him that I trusted
him, that I had need of him, that I was coming to him for help and
advice.  [SIR ROBERT CHILTERN _takes the letter out of his pocket_.]
Yes, that letter.  I didn’t go to Lord Goring’s, after all.  I felt that
it is from ourselves alone that help can come.  Pride made me think that.
Mrs. Cheveley went.  She stole my letter and sent it anonymously to you
this morning, that you should think . . . Oh! Robert, I cannot tell you
what she wished you to think. . . .

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  What!  Had I fallen so low in your eyes that you
thought that even for a moment I could have doubted your goodness?
Gertrude, Gertrude, you are to me the white image of all good things, and
sin can never touch you.  Arthur, you can go to Mabel, and you have my
best wishes!  Oh! stop a moment.  There is no name at the beginning of
this letter.  The brilliant Mrs. Cheveley does not seem to have noticed
that.  There should be a name.

LADY CHILTERN.  Let me write yours.  It is you I trust and need.  You and
none else.

LORD GORING.  Well, really, Lady Chiltern, I think I should have back my
own letter.

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Smiling_.]  No; you shall have Mabel.  [_Takes the
letter and writes her husband’s name on it_.]

LORD GORING.  Well, I hope she hasn’t changed her mind.  It’s nearly
twenty minutes since I saw her last.

[_Enter_ MABEL CHILTERN _and_ LORD CAVERSHAM.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  Lord Goring, I think your father’s conversation much
more improving than yours.  I am only going to talk to Lord Caversham in
the future, and always under the usual palm tree.

LORD GORING.  Darling!  [_Kisses her_.]

LORD CAVERSHAM.  [_Considerably taken aback_.]  What does this mean, sir?
You don’t mean to say that this charming, clever young lady has been so
foolish as to accept you?

LORD GORING.  Certainly, father!  And Chiltern’s been wise enough to
accept the seat in the Cabinet.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  I am very glad to hear that, Chiltern . . . I
congratulate you, sir.  If the country doesn’t go to the dogs or the
Radicals, we shall have you Prime Minister, some day.

[_Enter_ MASON.]

MASON.  Luncheon is on the table, my Lady!

[MASON _goes out_.]

MABEL CHILTERN.  You’ll stop to luncheon, Lord Caversham, won’t you?

LORD CAVERSHAM.  With pleasure, and I’ll drive you down to Downing Street
afterwards, Chiltern.  You have a great future before you, a great
future.  Wish I could say the same for you, sir.  [_To_ LORD GORING.]
But your career will have to be entirely domestic.

LORD GORING.  Yes, father, I prefer it domestic.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  And if you don’t make this young lady an ideal husband,
I’ll cut you off with a shilling.

MABEL CHILTERN.  An ideal husband!  Oh, I don’t think I should like that.
It sounds like something in the next world.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  What do you want him to be then, dear?

MABEL CHILTERN.  He can be what he chooses.  All I want is to be . . . to
be . . . oh! a real wife to him.

LORD CAVERSHAM.  Upon my word, there is a good deal of common sense in
that, Lady Chiltern.

[_They all go out except_ SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  _He sinks in a chair_,
_wrapt in thought_.  _After a little time_ LADY CHILTERN _returns to look
for him_.]

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Leaning over the back of the chair_.]  Aren’t you
coming in, Robert?

SIR ROBERT CHILTERN.  [_Taking her hand_.]  Gertrude, is it love you feel
for me, or is it pity merely?

LADY CHILTERN.  [_Kisses him_.]  It is love, Robert.  Love, and only
love.  For both of us a new life is beginning.

THE DECAY OF LYING:
AN OBSERVATION

CYRIL (_coming in through the open window from the terrace_).  My dear
Vivian, don’t coop yourself up all day in the library.  It is a perfectly
lovely afternoon.  The air is exquisite.  There is a mist upon the woods,
like the purple bloom upon a plum.  Let us go and lie on the grass and
smoke cigarettes and enjoy Nature.

VIVIAN.  Enjoy Nature!  I am glad to say that I have entirely lost that
faculty.  People tell us that Art makes us love Nature more than we loved
her before; that it reveals her secrets to us; and that after a careful
study of Corot and Constable we see things in her that had escaped our
observation.  My own experience is that the more we study Art, the less
we care for Nature.  What Art really reveals to us is Nature’s lack of
design, her curious crudities, her extraordinary monotony, her absolutely
unfinished condition.  Nature has good intentions, of course, but, as
Aristotle once said, she cannot carry them out.  When I look at a
landscape I cannot help seeing all its defects.  It is fortunate for us,
however, that Nature is so imperfect, as otherwise we should have no art
at all.  Art is our spirited protest, our gallant attempt to teach Nature
her proper place.  As for the infinite variety of Nature, that is a pure
myth.  It is not to be found in Nature herself.  It resides in the
imagination, or fancy, or cultivated blindness of the man who looks at
her.

CYRIL.  Well, you need not look at the landscape.  You can lie on the
grass and smoke and talk.

VIVIAN.  But Nature is so uncomfortable.  Grass is hard and lumpy and
damp, and full of dreadful black insects.  Why, even Morris’s poorest
workman could make you a more comfortable seat than the whole of Nature
can.  Nature pales before the furniture of ‘the street which from Oxford
has borrowed its name,’ as the poet you love so much once vilely phrased
it.  I don’t complain.  If Nature had been comfortable, mankind would
never have invented architecture, and I prefer houses to the open air.
In a house we all feel of the proper proportions.  Everything is
subordinated to us, fashioned for our use and our pleasure.  Egotism
itself, which is so necessary to a proper sense of human dignity, is
entirely the result of indoor life.  Out of doors one becomes abstract
and impersonal.  One’s individuality absolutely leaves one.  And then
Nature is so indifferent, so unappreciative.  Whenever I am walking in
the park here, I always feel that I am no more to her than the cattle
that browse on the slope, or the burdock that blooms in the ditch.
Nothing is more evident than that Nature hates Mind.  Thinking is the
most unhealthy thing in the world, and people die of it just as they die
of any other disease.  Fortunately, in England at any rate, thought is
not catching.  Our splendid physique as a people is entirely due to our
national stupidity.  I only hope we shall be able to keep this great
historic bulwark of our happiness for many years to come; but I am afraid
that we are beginning to be over-educated; at least everybody who is
incapable of learning has taken to teaching—that is really what our
enthusiasm for education has come to.  In the meantime, you had better go
back to your wearisome uncomfortable Nature, and leave me to correct my
proofs.

CYRIL.  Writing an article!  That is not very consistent after what you
have just said.

VIVIAN.  Who wants to be consistent?  The dullard and the doctrinaire,
the tedious people who carry out their principles to the bitter end of
action, to the _reductio ad absurdum_ of practice.  Not I.  Like Emerson,
I write over the door of my library the word ‘Whim.’  Besides, my article
is really a most salutary and valuable warning.  If it is attended to,
there may be a new Renaissance of Art.

CYRIL.  What is the subject?

VIVIAN.  I intend to call it ‘The Decay of Lying: A Protest.’

CYRIL.  Lying!  I should have thought that our politicians kept up that
habit.

VIVIAN.  I assure you that they do not.  They never rise beyond the level
of misrepresentation, and actually condescend to prove, to discuss, to
argue.  How different from the temper of the true liar, with his frank,
fearless statements, his superb irresponsibility, his healthy, natural
disdain of proof of any kind!  After all, what is a fine lie?  Simply
that which is its own evidence.  If a man is sufficiently unimaginative
to produce evidence in support of a lie, he might just as well speak the
truth at once.  No, the politicians won’t do.  Something may, perhaps, be
urged on behalf of the Bar.  The mantle of the Sophist has fallen on its
members.  Their feigned ardours and unreal rhetoric are delightful.  They
can make the worse appear the better cause, as though they were fresh
from Leontine schools, and have been known to wrest from reluctant juries
triumphant verdicts of acquittal for their clients, even when those
clients, as often happens, were clearly and unmistakeably innocent.  But
they are briefed by the prosaic, and are not ashamed to appeal to
precedent.  In spite of their endeavours, the truth will out.
Newspapers, even, have degenerated.  They may now be absolutely relied
upon.  One feels it as one wades through their columns.  It is always the
unreadable that occurs.  I am afraid that there is not much to be said in
favour of either the lawyer or the journalist.  Besides, what I am
pleading for is Lying in art.  Shall I read you what I have written?  It
might do you a great deal of good.

CYRIL.  Certainly, if you give me a cigarette.  Thanks.  By the way, what
magazine do you intend it for?

VIVIAN.  For the _Retrospective Review_.  I think I told you that the
elect had revived it.

CYRIL.  Whom do you mean by ‘the elect’?

VIVIAN.  Oh, The Tired Hedonists, of course.  It is a club to which I
belong.  We are supposed to wear faded roses in our button-holes when we
meet, and to have a sort of cult for Domitian.  I am afraid you are not
eligible.  You are too fond of simple pleasures.

CYRIL.  I should be black-balled on the ground of animal spirits, I
suppose?

VIVIAN.  Probably.  Besides, you are a little too old.  We don’t admit
anybody who is of the usual age.

CYRIL.  Well, I should fancy you are all a good deal bored with each
other.

VIVIAN.  We are.  This is one of the objects of the club.  Now, if you
promise not to interrupt too often, I will read you my article.

CYRIL.  You will find me all attention.

VIVIAN (_reading in a very clear_, _musical voice_).  THE DECAY OF LYING:
A PROTEST.—One of the chief causes that can be assigned for the curiously
commonplace character of most of the literature of our age is undoubtedly
the decay of Lying as an art, a science, and a social pleasure.  The
ancient historians gave us delightful fiction in the form of fact; the
modern novelist presents us with dull facts under the guise of fiction.
The Blue-Book is rapidly becoming his ideal both for method and manner.
He has his tedious _document humain_, his miserable little _coin de la
création_, into which he peers with his microscope.  He is to be found at
the Librairie Nationale, or at the British Museum, shamelessly reading up
his subject.  He has not even the courage of other people’s ideas, but
insists on going directly to life for everything, and ultimately, between
encyclopædias and personal experience, he comes to the ground, having
drawn his types from the family circle or from the weekly washerwoman,
and having acquired an amount of useful information from which never,
even in his most meditative moments, can he thoroughly free himself.

‘The lose that results to literature in general from this false ideal of
our time can hardly be overestimated.  People have a careless way of
talking about a “born liar,” just as they talk about a “born poet.”  But
in both cases they are wrong.  Lying and poetry are arts—arts, as Pinto
saw, not unconnected with each other—and they require the most careful
study, the most disinterested devotion.  Indeed, they have their
technique, just as the more material arts of painting and sculpture have,
their subtle secrets of form and colour, their craft-mysteries, their
deliberate artistic methods.  As one knows the poet by his fine music, so
one can recognise the liar by his rich rhythmic utterance, and in neither
case will the casual inspiration of the moment suffice.  Here, as
elsewhere, practice must, precede perfection.  But in modern days while
the fashion of writing poetry has become far too common, and should, if
possible, be discouraged, the fashion of lying has almost fallen into
disrepute.  Many a young man starts in life with a natural gift for
exaggeration which, if nurtured in congenial and sympathetic
surroundings, or by the imitation of the best models, might grow into
something really great and wonderful.  But, as a rule, he comes to
nothing.  He either falls into careless habits of accuracy—’

CYRIL.  My dear fellow!

VIVIAN.  Please don’t interrupt in the middle of a sentence.  ‘He either
falls into careless habits of accuracy, or takes to frequenting the
society of the aged and the well-informed.  Both things are equally fatal
to his imagination, as indeed they would be fatal to the imagination of
anybody, and in a short time he develops a morbid and unhealthy faculty
of truth-telling, begins to verify all statements made in his presence,
has no hesitation in contradicting people who are much younger than
himself, and often ends by writing novels which are so lifelike that no
one can possibly believe in their probability.  This is no isolated
instance that we are giving.  It is simply one example out of many; and
if something cannot be done to check, or at least to modify, our
monstrous worship of facts, Art will become sterile, and beauty will pass
away from the land.

‘Even Mr. Robert Louis Stevenson, that delightful master of delicate and
fanciful prose, is tainted with this modern vice, for we know positively
no other name for it.  There is such a thing as robbing a story of its
reality by trying to make it too true, and _The Black Arrow_ is so
inartistic as not to contain a single anachronism to boast of, while the
transformation of Dr. Jekyll reads dangerously like an experiment out of
the _Lancet_.  As for Mr. Rider Haggard, who really has, or had once, the
makings of a perfectly magnificent liar, he is now so afraid of being
suspected of genius that when he does tell us anything marvellous, he
feels bound to invent a personal reminiscence, and to put it into a
footnote as a kind of cowardly corroboration.  Nor are our other
novelists much better.  Mr. Henry James writes fiction as if it were a
painful duty, and wastes upon mean motives and imperceptible “points of
view” his neat literary style, his felicitous phrases, his swift and
caustic satire.  Mr. Hall Caine, it is true, aims at the grandiose, but
then he writes at the top of his voice.  He is so loud that one cannot
bear what he says.  Mr. James Payn is an adept in the art of concealing
what is not worth finding.  He hunts down the obvious with the enthusiasm
of a short-sighted detective.  As one turns over the pages, the suspense
of the author becomes almost unbearable.  The horses of Mr. William
Black’s phaeton do not soar towards the sun.  They merely frighten the
sky at evening into violent chromolithographic effects.  On seeing them
approach, the peasants take refuge in dialect.  Mrs. Oliphant prattles
pleasantly about curates, lawn-tennis parties, domesticity, and other
wearisome things.  Mr. Marion Crawford has immolated himself upon the
altar of local colour.  He is like the lady in the French comedy who
keeps talking about “le beau ciel d’Italie.”  Besides, he has fallen into
the bad habit of uttering moral platitudes.  He is always telling us that
to be good is to be good, and that to be bad is to be wicked.  At times
he is almost edifying.  _Robert Elsmere_ is of course a masterpiece—a
masterpiece of the “genre ennuyeux,” the one form of literature that the
English people seems thoroughly to enjoy.  A thoughtful young friend of
ours once told us that it reminded him of the sort of conversation that
goes on at a meat tea in the house of a serious Nonconformist family, and
we can quite believe it.  Indeed it is only in England that such a book
could be produced.  England is the home of lost ideas.  As for that great
and daily increasing school of novelists for whom the sun always rises in
the East-End, the only thing that can be said about them is that they
find life crude, and leave it raw.

‘In France, though nothing so deliberately tedious as _Robert Elsmere_
has been produced, things are not much better.  M. Guy de Maupassant,
with his keen mordant irony and his hard vivid style, strips life of the
few poor rags that still cover her, and shows us foul sore and festering
wound.  He writes lurid little tragedies in which everybody is
ridiculous; bitter comedies at which one cannot laugh for very tears.  M.
Zola, true to the lofty principle that he lays down in one of his
pronunciamientos on literature, “L’homme de génie n’a jamais d’esprit,”
is determined to show that, if he has not got genius, he can at least be
dull.  And how well he succeeds!  He is not without power.  Indeed at
times, as in _Germinal_, there is something almost epic in his work.  But
his work is entirely wrong from beginning to end, and wrong not on the
ground of morals, but on the ground of art.  From any ethical standpoint
it is just what it should be.  The author is perfectly truthful, and
describes things exactly as they happen.  What more can any moralist
desire?  We have no sympathy at all with the moral indignation of our
time against M. Zola.  It is simply the indignation of Tartuffe on being
exposed.  But from the standpoint of art, what can be said in favour of
the author of _L’Assommoir_, _Nana_ and _Pot-Bouille_?  Nothing.  Mr.
Ruskin once described the characters in George Eliot’s novels as being
like the sweepings of a Pentonville omnibus, but M. Zola’s characters are
much worse.  They have their dreary vices, and their drearier virtues.
The record of their lives is absolutely without interest.  Who cares what
happens to them?  In literature we require distinction, charm, beauty and
imaginative power.  We don’t want to be harrowed and disgusted with an
account of the doings of the lower orders.  M. Daudet is better.  He has
wit, a light touch and an amusing style.  But he has lately committed
literary suicide.  Nobody can possibly care for Delobelle with his “Il
faut lutter pour l’art,” or for Valmajour with his eternal refrain about
the nightingale, or for the poet in _Jack_ with his “mots cruels,” now
that we have learned from _Vingt Ans de ma Vie littéraire_ that these
characters were taken directly from life.  To us they seem to have
suddenly lost all their vitality, all the few qualities they ever
possessed.  The only real people are the people who never existed, and if
a novelist is base enough to go to life for his personages he should at
least pretend that they are creations, and not boast of them as copies.
The justification of a character in a novel is not that other persons are
what they are, but that the author is what he is.  Otherwise the novel is
not a work of art.  As for M. Paul Bourget, the master of the _roman
psychologique_, he commits the error of imagining that the men and women
of modern life are capable of being infinitely analysed for an
innumerable series of chapters.  In point of fact what is interesting
about people in good society—and M. Bourget rarely moves out of the
Faubourg St. Germain, except to come to London,—is the mask that each one
of them wears, not the reality that lies behind the mask.  It is a
humiliating confession, but we are all of us made out of the same stuff.
In Falstaff there is something of Hamlet, in Hamlet there is not a little
of Falstaff.  The fat knight has his moods of melancholy, and the young
prince his moments of coarse humour.  Where we differ from each other is
purely in accidentals: in dress, manner, tone of voice, religious
opinions, personal appearance, tricks of habit and the like.  The more
one analyses people, the more all reasons for analysis disappear.  Sooner
or later one comes to that dreadful universal thing called human nature.
Indeed, as any one who has ever worked among the poor knows only too
well, the brotherhood of man is no mere poet’s dream, it is a most
depressing and humiliating reality; and if a writer insists upon
analysing the upper classes, he might just as well write of match-girls
and costermongers at once.’  However, my dear Cyril, I will not detain
you any further just here.  I quite admit that modern novels have many
good points.  All I insist on is that, as a class, they are quite
unreadable.

CYRIL.  That is certainly a very grave qualification, but I must say that
I think you are rather unfair in some of your strictures.  I like _The
Deemster_, and _The Daughter of Heth_, and _Le Disciple_, and _Mr.
Isaacs_, and as for _Robert Elsmere_, I am quite devoted to it.  Not that
I can look upon it as a serious work.  As a statement of the problems
that confront the earnest Christian it is ridiculous and antiquated.  It
is simply Arnold’s _Literature and Dogma_ with the literature left out.
It is as much behind the age as Paley’s _Evidences_, or Colenso’s method
of Biblical exegesis.  Nor could anything be less impressive than the
unfortunate hero gravely heralding a dawn that rose long ago, and so
completely missing its true significance that he proposes to carry on the
business of the old firm under the new name.  On the other hand, it
contains several clever caricatures, and a heap of delightful quotations,
and Green’s philosophy very pleasantly sugars the somewhat bitter pill of
the author’s fiction.  I also cannot help expressing my surprise that you
have said nothing about the two novelists whom you are always reading,
Balzac and George Meredith.  Surely they are realists, both of them?

VIVIAN.  Ah!  Meredith!  Who can define him?  His style is chaos
illumined by flashes of lightning.  As a writer he has mastered
everything except language: as a novelist he can do everything, except
tell a story: as an artist he is everything except articulate.  Somebody
in Shakespeare—Touchstone, I think—talks about a man who is always
breaking his shins over his own wit, and it seems to me that this might
serve as the basis for a criticism of Meredith’s method.  But whatever he
is, he is not a realist.  Or rather I would say that he is a child of
realism who is not on speaking terms with his father.  By deliberate
choice he has made himself a romanticist.  He has refused to bow the knee
to Baal, and after all, even if the man’s fine spirit did not revolt
against the noisy assertions of realism, his style would be quite
sufficient of itself to keep life at a respectful distance.  By its means
he has planted round his garden a hedge full of thorns, and red with
wonderful roses.  As for Balzac, he was a most remarkable combination of
the artistic temperament with the scientific spirit.  The latter he
bequeathed to his disciples.  The former was entirely his own.  The
difference between such a book as M. Zola’s _L’Assommoir_ and Balzac’s
_Illusions Perdues_ is the difference between unimaginative realism and
imaginative reality.  ‘All Balzac’s characters;’ said Baudelaire, ‘are
gifted with the same ardour of life that animated himself.  All his
fictions are as deeply coloured as dreams.  Each mind is a weapon loaded
to the muzzle with will.  The very scullions have genius.’  A steady
course of Balzac reduces our living friends to shadows, and our
acquaintances to the shadows of shades.  His characters have a kind of
fervent fiery-coloured existence.  They dominate us, and defy scepticism.
One of the greatest tragedies of my life is the death of Lucien de
Rubempré.  It is a grief from which I have never been able completely to
rid myself.  It haunts me in my moments of pleasure.  I remember it when
I laugh.  But Balzac is no more a realist than Holbein was.  He created
life, he did not copy it.  I admit, however, that he set far too high a
value on modernity of form, and that, consequently, there is no book of
his that, as an artistic masterpiece, can rank with _Salammbô_ or
_Esmond_, or _The Cloister and the Hearth_, or the _Vicomte de
Bragelonne_.

CYRIL.  Do you object to modernity of form, then?

VIVIAN.  Yes.  It is a huge price to pay for a very poor result.  Pure
modernity of form is always somewhat vulgarising.  It cannot help being
so.  The public imagine that, because they are interested in their
immediate surroundings, Art should be interested in them also, and should
take them as her subject-matter.  But the mere fact that they are
interested in these things makes them unsuitable subjects for Art.  The
only beautiful things, as somebody once said, are the things that do not
concern us.  As long as a thing is useful or necessary to us, or affects
us in any way, either for pain or for pleasure, or appeals strongly to
our sympathies, or is a vital part of the environment in which we live,
it is outside the proper sphere of art.  To art’s subject-matter we
should be more or less indifferent.  We should, at any rate, have no
preferences, no prejudices, no partisan feeling of any kind.  It is
exactly because Hecuba is nothing to us that her sorrows are such an
admirable motive for a tragedy.  I do not know anything in the whole
history of literature sadder than the artistic career of Charles Reade.
He wrote one beautiful book, _The Cloister and the Hearth_, a book as
much above _Romola_ as _Romola_ is above _Daniel Deronda_, and wasted the
rest of his life in a foolish attempt to be modern, to draw public
attention to the state of our convict prisons, and the management of our
private lunatic asylums.  Charles Dickens was depressing enough in all
conscience when he tried to arouse our sympathy for the victims of the
poor-law administration; but Charles Reade, an artist, a scholar, a man
with a true sense of beauty, raging and roaring over the abuses of
contemporary life like a common pamphleteer or a sensational journalist,
is really a sight for the angels to weep over.  Believe me, my dear
Cyril, modernity of form and modernity of subject-matter are entirely and
absolutely wrong.  We have mistaken the common livery of the age for the
vesture of the Muses, and spend our days in the sordid streets and
hideous suburbs of our vile cities when we should be out on the hillside
with Apollo.  Certainly we are a degraded race, and have sold our
birthright for a mess of facts.

CYRIL.  There is something in what you say, and there is no doubt that
whatever amusement we may find in reading a purely model novel, we have
rarely any artistic pleasure in re-reading it.  And this is perhaps the
best rough test of what is literature and what is not.  If one cannot
enjoy reading a book over and over again, there is no use reading it at
all.  But what do you say about the return to Life and Nature?  This is
the panacea that is always being recommended to us.

VIVIAN.  I will read you what I say on that subject.  The passage comes
later on in the article, but I may as well give it to you now:—

‘The popular cry of our time is “Let us return to Life and Nature; they
will recreate Art for us, and send the red blood coursing through her
veins; they will shoe her feet with swiftness and make her hand strong.”
But, alas! we are mistaken in our amiable and well-meaning efforts.
Nature is always behind the age.  And as for Life, she is the solvent
that breaks up Art, the enemy that lays waste her house.’

CYRIL.  What do you mean by saying that Nature is always behind the age?

VIVIAN.  Well, perhaps that is rather cryptic.  What I mean is this.  If
we take Nature to mean natural simple instinct as opposed to
self-conscious culture, the work produced under this influence is always
old-fashioned, antiquated, and out of date.  One touch of Nature may make
the whole world kin, but two touches of Nature will destroy any work of
Art.  If, on the other hand, we regard Nature as the collection of
phenomena external to man, people only discover in her what they bring to
her.  She has no suggestions of her own.  Wordsworth went to the lakes,
but he was never a lake poet.  He found in stones the sermons he had
already hidden there.  He went moralising about the district, but his
good work was produced when he returned, not to Nature but to poetry.
Poetry gave him ‘Laodamia,’ and the fine sonnets, and the great Ode, such
as it is.  Nature gave him ‘Martha Ray’ and ‘Peter Bell,’ and the address
to Mr. Wilkinson’s spade.

CYRIL.  I think that view might be questioned.  I am rather inclined to
believe in ‘the impulse from a vernal wood,’ though of course the
artistic value of such an impulse depends entirely on the kind of
temperament that receives it, so that the return to Nature would come to
mean simply the advance to a great personality.  You would agree with
that, I fancy.  However, proceed with your article.

VIVIAN (_reading_).  ‘Art begins with abstract decoration, with purely
imaginative and pleasurable work dealing with what is unreal and
non-existent.  This is the first stage.  Then Life becomes fascinated
with this new wonder, and asks to be admitted into the charmed circle.
Art takes life as part of her rough material, recreates it, and
refashions it in fresh forms, is absolutely indifferent to fact, invents,
imagines, dreams, and keeps between herself and reality the impenetrable
barrier of beautiful style, of decorative or ideal treatment.  The third
stage is when Life gets the upper hand, and drives Art out into the
wilderness.  That is the true decadence, and it is from this that we are
now suffering.

‘Take the case of the English drama.  At first in the hands of the monks
Dramatic Art was abstract, decorative and mythological.  Then she
enlisted Life in her service, and using some of life’s external forms,
she created an entirely new race of beings, whose sorrows were more
terrible than any sorrow man has ever felt, whose joys were keener than
lover’s joys, who had the rage of the Titans and the calm of the gods,
who had monstrous and marvellous sins, monstrous and marvellous virtues.
To them she gave a language different from that of actual use, a language
full of resonant music and sweet rhythm, made stately by solemn cadence,
or made delicate by fanciful rhyme, jewelled with wonderful words, and
enriched with lofty diction.  She clothed her children in strange raiment
and gave them masks, and at her bidding the antique world rose from its
marble tomb.  A new Cæsar stalked through the streets of risen Rome, and
with purple sail and flute-led oars another Cleopatra passed up the river
to Antioch.  Old myth and legend and dream took shape and substance.
History was entirely re-written, and there was hardly one of the
dramatists who did not recognise that the object of Art is not simple
truth but complex beauty.  In this they were perfectly right.  Art itself
is really a form of exaggeration; and selection, which is the very spirit
of art, is nothing more than an intensified mode of over-emphasis.

‘But Life soon shattered the perfection of the form.  Even in Shakespeare
we can see the beginning of the end.  It shows itself by the gradual
breaking-up of the blank-verse in the later plays, by the predominance
given to prose, and by the over-importance assigned to characterisation.
The passages in Shakespeare—and they are many—where the language is
uncouth, vulgar, exaggerated, fantastic, obscene even, are entirely due
to Life calling for an echo of her own voice, and rejecting the
intervention of beautiful style, through which alone should life be
suffered to find expression.  Shakespeare is not by any means a flawless
artist.  He is too fond of going directly to life, and borrowing life’s
natural utterance.  He forgets that when Art surrenders her imaginative
medium she surrenders everything.  Goethe says, somewhere—

    In der Beschränkung zeigt Fsich erst der Meister,

“It is in working within limits that the master reveals himself,” and the
limitation, the very condition of any art is style.  However, we need not
linger any longer over Shakespeare’s realism.  _The Tempest_ is the most
perfect of palinodes.  All that we desired to point out was, that the
magnificent work of the Elizabethan and Jacobean artists contained within
itself the seeds of its own dissolution, and that, if it drew some of its
strength from using life as rough material, it drew all its weakness from
using life as an artistic method.  As the inevitable result of this
substitution of an imitative for a creative medium, this surrender of an
imaginative form, we have the modern English melodrama.  The characters
in these plays talk on the stage exactly as they would talk off it; they
have neither aspirations nor aspirates; they are taken directly from life
and reproduce its vulgarity down to the smallest detail; they present the
gait, manner, costume and accent of real people; they would pass
unnoticed in a third-class railway carriage.  And yet how wearisome the
plays are!  They do not succeed in producing even that impression of
reality at which they aim, and which is their only reason for existing.
As a method, realism is a complete failure.

‘What is true about the drama and the novel is no less true about those
arts that we call the decorative arts.  The whole history of these arts
in Europe is the record of the struggle between Orientalism, with its
frank rejection of imitation, its love of artistic convention, its
dislike to the actual representation of any object in Nature, and our own
imitative spirit.  Wherever the former has been paramount, as in
Byzantium, Sicily and Spain, by actual contact, or in the rest of Europe
by the influence of the Crusades, we have had beautiful and imaginative
work in which the visible things of life are transmuted into artistic
conventions, and the things that Life has not are invented and fashioned
for her delight.  But wherever we have returned to Life and Nature, our
work has always become vulgar, common and uninteresting.  Modern
tapestry, with its aërial effects, its elaborate perspective, its broad
expanses of waste sky, its faithful and laborious realism, has no beauty
whatsoever.  The pictorial glass of Germany is absolutely detestable.  We
are beginning to weave possible carpets in England, but only because we
have returned to the method and spirit of the East.  Our rugs and carpets
of twenty years ago, with their solemn depressing truths, their inane
worship of Nature, their sordid reproductions of visible objects, have
become, even to the Philistine, a source of laughter.  A cultured
Mahomedan once remarked to us, “You Christians are so occupied in
misinterpreting the fourth commandment that you have never thought of
making an artistic application of the second.”  He was perfectly right,
and the whole truth of the matter is this: The proper school to learn art
in is not Life but Art.’

And now let me read you a passage which seems to me to settle the
question very completely.

‘It was not always thus.  We need not say anything about the poets, for
they, with the unfortunate exception of Mr. Wordsworth, have been really
faithful to their high mission, and are universally recognised as being
absolutely unreliable.  But in the works of Herodotus, who, in spite of
the shallow and ungenerous attempts of modern sciolists to verify his
history, may justly be called the “Father of Lies”; in the published
speeches of Cicero and the biographies of Suetonius; in Tacitus at his
best; in Pliny’s _Natural History_; in Hanno’s _Periplus_; in all the
early chronicles; in the Lives of the Saints; in Froissart and Sir Thomas
Malory; in the travels of Marco Polo; in Olaus Magnus, and Aldrovandus,
and Conrad Lycosthenes, with his magnificent _Prodigiorum et Ostentorum
Chronicon_; in the autobiography of Benvenuto Cellini; in the memoirs of
Casanova; in Defoe’s _History of the Plague_; in Boswell’s _Life of
Johnson_; in Napoleon’s despatches, and in the works of our own Carlyle,
whose _French Revolution_ is one of the most fascinating historical
novels ever written, facts are either kept in their proper subordinate
position, or else entirely excluded on the general ground of dulness.
Now, everything is changed.  Facts are not merely finding a footing-place
in history, but they are usurping the domain of Fancy, and have invaded
the kingdom of Romance.  Their chilling touch is over everything.  They
are vulgarising mankind.  The crude commercialism of America, its
materialising spirit, its indifference to the poetical side of things,
and its lack of imagination and of high unattainable ideals, are entirely
due to that country having adopted for its national hero a man who,
according to his own confession, was incapable of telling a lie, and it
is not too much to say that the story of George Washington and the
cherry-tree has done more harm, and in a shorter space of time, than any
other moral tale in the whole of literature.’

CYRIL.  My dear boy!

VIVIAN.  I assure you it is the case, and the amusing part of the whole
thing is that the story of the cherry-tree is an absolute myth.  However,
you must not think that I am too despondent about the artistic future
either of America or of our own country.  Listen to this:—

‘That some change will take place before this century has drawn to its
close we have no doubt whatsoever.  Bored by the tedious and improving
conversation of those who have neither the wit to exaggerate nor the
genius to romance, tired of the intelligent person whose reminiscences
are always based upon memory, whose statements are invariably limited by
probability, and who is at any time liable to be corroborated by the
merest Philistine who happens to be present, Society sooner or later must
return to its lost leader, the cultured and fascinating liar.  Who he was
who first, without ever having gone out to the rude chase, told the
wandering cavemen at sunset how he had dragged the Megatherium from the
purple darkness of its jasper cave, or slain the Mammoth in single combat
and brought back its gilded tusks, we cannot tell, and not one of our
modern anthropologists, for all their much-boasted science, has had the
ordinary courage to tell us.  Whatever was his name or race, he certainly
was the true founder of social intercourse.  For the aim of the liar is
simply to charm, to delight, to give pleasure.  He is the very basis of
civilised society, and without him a dinner-party, even at the mansions
of the great, is as dull as a lecture at the Royal Society, or a debate
at the Incorporated Authors, or one of Mr. Burnand’s farcical comedies.

‘Nor will he be welcomed by society alone.  Art, breaking from the
prison-house of realism, will run to greet him, and will kiss his false,
beautiful lips, knowing that he alone is in possession of the great
secret of all her manifestations, the secret that Truth is entirely and
absolutely a matter of style; while Life—poor, probable, uninteresting
human life—tired of repeating herself for the benefit of Mr. Herbert
Spencer, scientific historians, and the compilers of statistics in
general, will follow meekly after him, and try to reproduce, in her own
simple and untutored way, some of the marvels of which he talks.

‘No doubt there will always be critics who, like a certain writer in the
_Saturday Review_, will gravely censure the teller of fairy tales for his
defective knowledge of natural history, who will measure imaginative work
by their own lack of any imaginative faculty, and will hold up their
ink-stained hands in horror if some honest gentleman, who has never been
farther than the yew-trees of his own garden, pens a fascinating book of
travels like Sir John Mandeville, or, like great Raleigh, writes a whole
history of the world, without knowing anything whatsoever about the past.
To excuse themselves they will try and shelter under the shield of him
who made Prospero the magician, and gave him Caliban and Ariel as his
servants, who heard the Tritons blowing their horns round the coral reefs
of the Enchanted Isle, and the fairies singing to each other in a wood
near Athens, who led the phantom kings in dim procession across the misty
Scottish heath, and hid Hecate in a cave with the weird sisters.  They
will call upon Shakespeare—they always do—and will quote that hackneyed
passage forgetting that this unfortunate aphorism about Art holding the
mirror up to Nature, is deliberately said by Hamlet in order to convince
the bystanders of his absolute insanity in all art-matters.’

CYRIL.  Ahem!  Another cigarette, please.

VIVIAN.  My dear fellow, whatever you may say, it is merely a dramatic
utterance, and no more represents Shakespeare’s real views upon art than
the speeches of Iago represent his real views upon morals.  But let me
get to the end of the passage:

‘Art finds her own perfection within, and not outside of, herself.  She
is not to be judged by any external standard of resemblance.  She is a
veil, rather than a mirror.  She has flowers that no forests know of,
birds that no woodland possesses.  She makes and unmakes many worlds, and
can draw the moon from heaven with a scarlet thread.  Hers are the “forms
more real than living man,” and hers the great archetypes of which things
that have existence are but unfinished copies.  Nature has, in her eyes,
no laws, no uniformity.  She can work miracles at her will, and when she
calls monsters from the deep they come.  She can bid the almond-tree
blossom in winter, and send the snow upon the ripe cornfield.  At her
word the frost lays its silver finger on the burning mouth of June, and
the winged lions creep out from the hollows of the Lydian hills.  The
dryads peer from the thicket as she passes by, and the brown fauns smile
strangely at her when she comes near them.  She has hawk-faced gods that
worship her, and the centaurs gallop at her side.’

CYRIL.  I like that.  I can see it.  Is that the end?

VIVIAN.  No.  There is one more passage, but it is purely practical.  It
simply suggests some methods by which we could revive this lost art of
Lying.

CYRIL.  Well, before you read it to me, I should like to ask you a
question.  What do you mean by saying that life, ‘poor, probable,
uninteresting human life,’ will try to reproduce the marvels of art?  I
can quite understand your objection to art being treated as a mirror.
You think it would reduce genius to the position of a cracked
looking-glass.  But you don’t mean to say that you seriously believe that
Life imitates Art, that Life in fact is the mirror, and Art the reality?

VIVIAN.  Certainly I do.  Paradox though it may seem—and paradoxes are
always dangerous things—it is none the less true that Life imitates art
far more than Art imitates life.  We have all seen in our own day in
England how a certain curious and fascinating type of beauty, invented
and emphasised by two imaginative painters, has so influenced Life that
whenever one goes to a private view or to an artistic salon one sees,
here the mystic eyes of Rossetti’s dream, the long ivory throat, the
strange square-cut jaw, the loosened shadowy hair that he so ardently
loved, there the sweet maidenhood of ‘The Golden Stair,’ the blossom-like
mouth and weary loveliness of the ‘Laus Amoris,’ the passion-pale face of
Andromeda, the thin hands and lithe beauty of the Vivian in ‘Merlin’s
Dream.’  And it has always been so.  A great artist invents a type, and
Life tries to copy it, to reproduce it in a popular form, like an
enterprising publisher.  Neither Holbein nor Vandyck found in England
what they have given us.  They brought their types with them, and Life
with her keen imitative faculty set herself to supply the master with
models.  The Greeks, with their quick artistic instinct, understood this,
and set in the bride’s chamber the statue of Hermes or of Apollo, that
she might bear children as lovely as the works of art that she looked at
in her rapture or her pain.  They knew that Life gains from art not
merely spirituality, depth of thought and feeling, soul-turmoil or
soul-peace, but that she can form herself on the very lines and colours
of art, and can reproduce the dignity of Pheidias as well as the grace of
Praxiteles.  Hence came their objection to realism.  They disliked it on
purely social grounds.  They felt that it inevitably makes people ugly,
and they were perfectly right.  We try to improve the conditions of the
race by means of good air, free sunlight, wholesome water, and hideous
bare buildings for the better housing of the lower orders.  But these
things merely produce health, they do not produce beauty.  For this, Art
is required, and the true disciples of the great artist are not his
studio-imitators, but those who become like his works of art, be they
plastic as in Greek days, or pictorial as in modern times; in a word,
Life is Art’s best, Art’s only pupil.

As it is with the visible arts, so it is with literature.  The most
obvious and the vulgarest form in which this is shown is in the case of
the silly boys who, after reading the adventures of Jack Sheppard or Dick
Turpin, pillage the stalls of unfortunate apple-women, break into
sweet-shops at night, and alarm old gentlemen who are returning home from
the city by leaping out on them in suburban lanes, with black masks and
unloaded revolvers.  This interesting phenomenon, which always occurs
after the appearance of a new edition of either of the books I have
alluded to, is usually attributed to the influence of literature on the
imagination.  But this is a mistake.  The imagination is essentially
creative, and always seeks for a new form.  The boy-burglar is simply the
inevitable result of life’s imitative instinct.  He is Fact, occupied as
Fact usually is, with trying to reproduce Fiction, and what we see in him
is repeated on an extended scale throughout the whole of life.
Schopenhauer has analysed the pessimism that characterises modern
thought, but Hamlet invented it.  The world has become sad because a
puppet was once melancholy.  The Nihilist, that strange martyr who has no
faith, who goes to the stake without enthusiasm, and dies for what he
does not believe in, is a purely literary product.  He was invented by
Tourgénieff, and completed by Dostoieffski.  Robespierre came out of the
pages of Rousseau as surely as the People’s Palace rose out of the
_débris_ of a novel.  Literature always anticipates life.  It does not
copy it, but moulds it to its purpose.  The nineteenth century, as we
know it, is largely an invention of Balzac.  Our Luciens de Rubempré, our
Rastignacs, and De Marsays made their first appearance on the stage of
the _Comédie Humaine_.  We are merely carrying out, with footnotes and
unnecessary additions, the whim or fancy or creative vision of a great
novelist.  I once asked a lady, who knew Thackeray intimately, whether he
had had any model for Becky Sharp.  She told me that Becky was an
invention, but that the idea of the character had been partly suggested
by a governess who lived in the neighbourhood of Kensington Square, and
was the companion of a very selfish and rich old woman.  I inquired what
became of the governess, and she replied that, oddly enough, some years
after the appearance of _Vanity Fair_, she ran away with the nephew of
the lady with whom she was living, and for a short time made a great
splash in society, quite in Mrs. Rawdon Crawley’s style, and entirely by
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley’s methods.  Ultimately she came to grief, disappeared
to the Continent, and used to be occasionally seen at Monte Carlo and
other gambling places.  The noble gentleman from whom the same great
sentimentalist drew Colonel Newcome died, a few months after _The
Newcomer_ had reached a fourth edition, with the word ‘Adsum’ on his
lips.  Shortly after Mr. Stevenson published his curious psychological
story of transformation, a friend of mine, called Mr. Hyde, was in the
north of London, and being anxious to get to a railway station, took what
he thought would be a short cut, lost his way, and found himself in a
network of mean, evil-looking streets.  Feeling rather nervous he began
to walk extremely fast, when suddenly out of an archway ran a child right
between his legs.  It fell on the pavement, he tripped over it, and
trampled upon it.  Being of course very much frightened and a little
hurt, it began to scream, and in a few seconds the whole street was full
of rough people who came pouring out of the houses like ants.  They
surrounded him, and asked him his name.  He was just about to give it
when he suddenly remembered the opening incident in Mr. Stevenson’s
story.  He was so filled with horror at having realised in his own person
that terrible and well-written scene, and at having done accidentally,
though in fact, what the Mr. Hyde of fiction had done with deliberate
intent, that he ran away as hard as he could go.  He was, however, very
closely followed, and finally he took refuge in a surgery, the door of
which happened to be open, where he explained to a young assistant, who
happened to be there, exactly what had occurred.  The humanitarian crowd
were induced to go away on his giving them a small sum of money, and as
soon as the coast was clear he left.  As he passed out, the name on the
brass door-plate of the surgery caught his eye.  It was ‘Jekyll.’  At
least it should have been.

Here the imitation, as far as it went, was of course accidental.  In the
following case the imitation was self-conscious.  In the year 1879, just
after I had left Oxford, I met at a reception at the house of one of the
Foreign Ministers a woman of very curious exotic beauty.  We became great
friends, and were constantly together.  And yet what interested me most
in her was not her beauty, but her character, her entire vagueness of
character.  She seemed to have no personality at all, but simply the
possibility of many types.  Sometimes she would give herself up entirely
to art, turn her drawing-room into a studio, and spend two or three days
a week at picture galleries or museums.  Then she would take to attending
race-meetings, wear the most horsey clothes, and talk about nothing but
betting.  She abandoned religion for mesmerism, mesmerism for politics,
and politics for the melodramatic excitements of philanthropy.  In fact,
she was a kind of Proteus, and as much a failure in all her
transformations as was that wondrous sea-god when Odysseus laid hold of
him.  One day a serial began in one of the French magazines.  At that
time I used to read serial stories, and I well remember the shock of
surprise I felt when I came to the description of the heroine.  She was
so like my friend that I brought her the magazine, and she recognised
herself in it immediately, and seemed fascinated by the resemblance.  I
should tell you, by the way, that the story was translated from some dead
Russian writer, so that the author had not taken his type from my friend.
Well, to put the matter briefly, some months afterwards I was in Venice,
and finding the magazine in the reading-room of the hotel, I took it up
casually to see what had become of the heroine.  It was a most piteous
tale, as the girl had ended by running away with a man absolutely
inferior to her, not merely in social station, but in character and
intellect also.  I wrote to my friend that evening about my views on John
Bellini, and the admirable ices at Florian’s, and the artistic value of
gondolas, but added a postscript to the effect that her double in the
story had behaved in a very silly manner.  I don’t know why I added that,
but I remember I had a sort of dread over me that she might do the same
thing.  Before my letter had reached her, she had run away with a man who
deserted her in six months.  I saw her in 1884 in Paris, where she was
living with her mother, and I asked her whether the story had had
anything to do with her action.  She told me that she had felt an
absolutely irresistible impulse to follow the heroine step by step in her
strange and fatal progress, and that it was with a feeling of real terror
that she had looked forward to the last few chapters of the story.  When
they appeared, it seemed to her that she was compelled to reproduce them
in life, and she did so.  It was a most clear example of this imitative
instinct of which I was speaking, and an extremely tragic one.

However, I do not wish to dwell any further upon individual instances.
Personal experience is a most vicious and limited circle.  All that I
desire to point out is the general principle that Life imitates Art far
more than Art imitates Life, and I feel sure that if you think seriously
about it you will find that it is true.  Life holds the mirror up to Art,
and either reproduces some strange type imagined by painter or sculptor,
or realises in fact what has been dreamed in fiction.  Scientifically
speaking, the basis of life—the energy of life, as Aristotle would call
it—is simply the desire for expression, and Art is always presenting
various forms through which this expression can be attained.  Life seizes
on them and uses them, even if they be to her own hurt.  Young men have
committed suicide because Rolla did so, have died by their own hand
because by his own hand Werther died.  Think of what we owe to the
imitation of Christ, of what we owe to the imitation of Cæsar.

CYRIL.  The theory is certainly a very curious one, but to make it
complete you must show that Nature, no less than Life, is an imitation of
Art.  Are you prepared to prove that?

VIVIAN.  My dear fellow, I am prepared to prove anything.

CYRIL.  Nature follows the landscape painter, then, and takes her effects
from him?

VIVIAN.  Certainly.  Where, if not from the Impressionists, do we get
those wonderful brown fogs that come creeping down our streets, blurring
the gas-lamps and changing the houses into monstrous shadows?  To whom,
if not to them and their master, do we owe the lovely silver mists that
brood over our river, and turn to faint forms of fading grace curved
bridge and swaying barge?  The extraordinary change that has taken place
in the climate of London during the last ten years is entirely due to a
particular school of Art.  You smile.  Consider the matter from a
scientific or a metaphysical point of view, and you will find that I am
right.  For what is Nature?  Nature is no great mother who has borne us.
She is our creation.  It is in our brain that she quickens to life.
Things are because we see them, and what we see, and how we see it,
depends on the Arts that have influenced us.  To look at a thing is very
different from seeing a thing.  One does not see anything until one sees
its beauty.  Then, and then only, does it come into existence.  At
present, people see fogs, not because there are fogs, but because poets
and painters have taught them the mysterious loveliness of such effects.
There may have been fogs for centuries in London.  I dare say there were.
But no one saw them, and so we do not know anything about them.  They did
not exist till Art had invented them.  Now, it must be admitted, fogs are
carried to excess.  They have become the mere mannerism of a clique, and
the exaggerated realism of their method gives dull people bronchitis.
Where the cultured catch an effect, the uncultured catch cold.  And so,
let us be humane, and invite Art to turn her wonderful eyes elsewhere.
She has done so already, indeed.  That white quivering sunlight that one
sees now in France, with its strange blotches of mauve, and its restless
violet shadows, is her latest fancy, and, on the whole, Nature reproduces
it quite admirably.  Where she used to give us Corots and Daubignys, she
gives us now exquisite Monets and entrancing Pissaros.  Indeed there are
moments, rare, it is true, but still to be observed from time to time,
when Nature becomes absolutely modern.  Of course she is not always to be
relied upon.  The fact is that she is in this unfortunate position.  Art
creates an incomparable and unique effect, and, having done so, passes on
to other things.  Nature, upon the other hand, forgetting that imitation
can be made the sincerest form of insult, keeps on repeating this effect
until we all become absolutely wearied of it.  Nobody of any real
culture, for instance, ever talks nowadays about the beauty of a sunset.
Sunsets are quite old-fashioned.  They belong to the time when Turner was
the last note in art.  To admire them is a distinct sign of provincialism
of temperament.  Upon the other hand they go on.  Yesterday evening Mrs.
Arundel insisted on my going to the window, and looking at the glorious
sky, as she called it.  Of course I had to look at it.  She is one of
those absurdly pretty Philistines to whom one can deny nothing.  And what
was it?  It was simply a very second-rate Turner, a Turner of a bad
period, with all the painter’s worst faults exaggerated and
over-emphasised.  Of course, I am quite ready to admit that Life very
often commits the same error.  She produces her false Renés and her sham
Vautrins, just as Nature gives us, on one day a doubtful Cuyp, and on
another a more than questionable Rousseau.  Still, Nature irritates one
more when she does things of that kind.  It seems so stupid, so obvious,
so unnecessary.  A false Vautrin might be delightful.  A doubtful Cuyp is
unbearable.  However, I don’t want to be too hard on Nature.  I wish the
Channel, especially at Hastings, did not look quite so often like a Henry
Moore, grey pearl with yellow lights, but then, when Art is more varied,
Nature will, no doubt, be more varied also.  That she imitates Art, I
don’t think even her worst enemy would deny now.  It is the one thing
that keeps her in touch with civilised man.  But have I proved my theory
to your satisfaction?

CYRIL.  You have proved it to my dissatisfaction, which is better.  But
even admitting this strange imitative instinct in Life and Nature, surely
you would acknowledge that Art expresses the temper of its age, the
spirit of its time, the moral and social conditions that surround it, and
under whose influence it is produced.

VIVIAN.  Certainly not!  Art never expresses anything but itself.  This
is the principle of my new æsthetics; and it is this, more than that
vital connection between form and substance, on which Mr. Pater dwells,
that makes music the type of all the arts.  Of course, nations and
individuals, with that healthy natural vanity which is the secret of
existence, are always under the impression that it is of them that the
Muses are talking, always trying to find in the calm dignity of
imaginative art some mirror of their own turbid passions, always
forgetting that the singer of life is not Apollo but Marsyas.  Remote
from reality, and with her eyes turned away from the shadows of the cave,
Art reveals her own perfection, and the wondering crowd that watches the
opening of the marvellous, many-petalled rose fancies that it is its own
history that is being told to it, its own spirit that is finding
expression in a new form.  But it is not so.  The highest art rejects the
burden of the human spirit, and gains more from a new medium or a fresh
material than she does from any enthusiasm for art, or from any lofty
passion, or from any great awakening of the human consciousness.  She
develops purely on her own lines.  She is not symbolic of any age.  It is
the ages that are her symbols.

Even those who hold that Art is representative of time and place and
people cannot help admitting that the more imitative an art is, the less
it represents to us the spirit of its age.  The evil faces of the Roman
emperors look out at us from the foul porphyry and spotted jasper in
which the realistic artists of the day delighted to work, and we fancy
that in those cruel lips and heavy sensual jaws we can find the secret of
the ruin of the Empire.  But it was not so.  The vices of Tiberius could
not destroy that supreme civilisation, any more than the virtues of the
Antonines could save it.  It fell for other, for less interesting
reasons.  The sibyls and prophets of the Sistine may indeed serve to
interpret for some that new birth of the emancipated spirit that we call
the Renaissance; but what do the drunken boors and bawling peasants of
Dutch art tell us about the great soul of Holland?  The more abstract,
the more ideal an art is, the more it reveals to us the temper of its
age.  If we wish to understand a nation by means of its art, let us look
at its architecture or its music.

CYRIL.  I quite agree with you there.  The spirit of an age may be best
expressed in the abstract ideal arts, for the spirit itself is abstract
and ideal.  Upon the other hand, for the visible aspect of an age, for
its look, as the phrase goes, we must of course go to the arts of
imitation.

VIVIAN.  I don’t think so.  After all, what the imitative arts really
give us are merely the various styles of particular artists, or of
certain schools of artists.  Surely you don’t imagine that the people of
the Middle Ages bore any resemblance at all to the figures on mediæval
stained glass, or in mediæval stone and wood carving, or on mediæval
metal-work, or tapestries, or illuminated MSS.  They were probably very
ordinary-looking people, with nothing grotesque, or remarkable, or
fantastic in their appearance.  The Middle Ages, as we know them in art,
are simply a definite form of style, and there is no reason at all why an
artist with this style should not be produced in the nineteenth century.
No great artist ever sees things as they really are.  If he did, he would
cease to be an artist.  Take an example from our own day.  I know that
you are fond of Japanese things.  Now, do you really imagine that the
Japanese people, as they are presented to us in art, have any existence?
If you do, you have never understood Japanese art at all.  The Japanese
people are the deliberate self-conscious creation of certain individual
artists.  If you set a picture by Hokusai, or Hokkei, or any of the great
native painters, beside a real Japanese gentleman or lady, you will see
that there is not the slightest resemblance between them.  The actual
people who live in Japan are not unlike the general run of English
people; that is to say, they are extremely commonplace, and have nothing
curious or extraordinary about them.  In fact the whole of Japan is a
pure invention.  There is no such country, there are no such people.  One
of our most charming painters went recently to the Land of the
Chrysanthemum in the foolish hope of seeing the Japanese.  All he saw,
all he had the chance of painting, were a few lanterns and some fans.  He
was quite unable to discover the inhabitants, as his delightful
exhibition at Messrs. Dowdeswell’s Gallery showed only too well.  He did
not know that the Japanese people are, as I have said, simply a mode of
style, an exquisite fancy of art.  And so, if you desire to see a
Japanese effect, you will not behave like a tourist and go to Tokio.  On
the contrary, you will stay at home and steep yourself in the work of
certain Japanese artists, and then, when you have absorbed the spirit of
their style, and caught their imaginative manner of vision, you will go
some afternoon and sit in the Park or stroll down Piccadilly, and if you
cannot see an absolutely Japanese effect there, you will not see it
anywhere.  Or, to return again to the past, take as another instance the
ancient Greeks.  Do you think that Greek art ever tells us what the Greek
people were like?  Do you believe that the Athenian women were like the
stately dignified figures of the Parthenon frieze, or like those
marvellous goddesses who sat in the triangular pediments of the same
building?  If you judge from the art, they certainly were so.  But read
an authority, like Aristophanes, for instance.  You will find that the
Athenian ladies laced tightly, wore high-heeled shoes, dyed their hair
yellow, painted and rouged their faces, and were exactly like any silly
fashionable or fallen creature of our own day.  The fact is that we look
back on the ages entirely through the medium of art, and art, very
fortunately, has never once told us the truth.

CYRIL.  But modern portraits by English painters, what of them?  Surely
they are like the people they pretend to represent?

VIVIAN.  Quite so.  They are so like them that a hundred years from now
no one will believe in them.  The only portraits in which one believes
are portraits where there is very little of the sitter, and a very great
deal of the artist.  Holbein’s drawings of the men and women of his time
impress us with a sense of their absolute reality.  But this is simply
because Holbein compelled life to accept his conditions, to restrain
itself within his limitations, to reproduce his type, and to appear as he
wished it to appear.  It is style that makes us believe in a
thing—nothing but style.  Most of our modern portrait painters are doomed
to absolute oblivion.  They never paint what they see.  They paint what
the public sees, and the public never sees anything.

CYRIL.  Well, after that I think I should like to hear the end of your
article.

VIVIAN.  With pleasure.  Whether it will do any good I really cannot say.
Ours is certainly the dullest and most prosaic century possible.  Why,
even Sleep has played us false, and has closed up the gates of ivory, and
opened the gates of horn.  The dreams of the great middle classes of this
country, as recorded in Mr. Myers’s two bulky volumes on the subject, and
in the Transactions of the Psychical Society, are the most depressing
things that I have ever read.  There is not even a fine nightmare among
them.  They are commonplace, sordid and tedious.  As for the Church, I
cannot conceive anything better for the culture of a country than the
presence in it of a body of men whose duty it is to believe in the
supernatural, to perform daily miracles, and to keep alive that
mythopoeic faculty which is so essential for the imagination.  But in the
English Church a man succeeds, not through his capacity for belief, but
through his capacity for disbelief.  Ours is the only Church where the
sceptic stands at the altar, and where St. Thomas is regarded as the
ideal apostle.  Many a worthy clergyman, who passes his life in admirable
works of kindly charity, lives and dies unnoticed and unknown; but it is
sufficient for some shallow uneducated passman out of either University
to get up in his pulpit and express his doubts about Noah’s ark, or
Balaam’s ass, or Jonah and the whale, for half of London to flock to hear
him, and to sit open-mouthed in rapt admiration at his superb intellect.
The growth of common sense in the English Church is a thing very much to
be regretted.  It is really a degrading concession to a low form of
realism.  It is silly, too.  It springs from an entire ignorance of
psychology.  Man can believe the impossible, but man can never believe
the improbable.  However, I must read the end of my article:—

‘What we have to do, what at any rate it is our duty to do, is to revive
this old art of Lying.  Much of course may be done, in the way of
educating the public, by amateurs in the domestic circle, at literary
lunches, and at afternoon teas.  But this is merely the light and
graceful side of lying, such as was probably heard at Cretan
dinner-parties.  There are many other forms.  Lying for the sake of
gaining some immediate personal advantage, for instance—lying with a
moral purpose, as it is usually called—though of late it has been rather
looked down upon, was extremely popular with the antique world.  Athena
laughs when Odysseus tells her “his words of sly devising,” as Mr.
William Morris phrases it, and the glory of mendacity illumines the pale
brow of the stainless hero of Euripidean tragedy, and sets among the
noble women of the past the young bride of one of Horace’s most exquisite
odes.  Later on, what at first had been merely a natural instinct was
elevated into a self-conscious science.  Elaborate rules were laid down
for the guidance of mankind, and an important school of literature grew
up round the subject.  Indeed, when one remembers the excellent
philosophical treatise of Sanchez on the whole question, one cannot help
regretting that no one has ever thought of publishing a cheap and
condensed edition of the works of that great casuist.  A short primer,
“When to Lie and How,” if brought out in an attractive and not too
expensive a form, would no doubt command a large sale, and would prove of
real practical service to many earnest and deep-thinking people.  Lying
for the sake of the improvement of the young, which is the basis of home
education, still lingers amongst us, and its advantages are so admirably
set forth in the early books of Plato’s _Republic_ that it is unnecessary
to dwell upon them here.  It is a mode of lying for which all good
mothers have peculiar capabilities, but it is capable of still further
development, and has been sadly overlooked by the School Board.  Lying
for the sake of a monthly salary is of course well known in Fleet Street,
and the profession of a political leader-writer is not without its
advantages.  But it is said to be a somewhat dull occupation, and it
certainly does not lead to much beyond a kind of ostentatious obscurity.
The only form of lying that is absolutely beyond reproach is lying for
its own sake, and the highest development of this is, as we have already
pointed out, Lying in Art.  Just as those who do not love Plato more than
Truth cannot pass beyond the threshold of the Academe, so those who do
not love Beauty more than Truth never know the inmost shrine of Art.  The
solid stolid British intellect lies in the desert sands like the Sphinx
in Flaubert’s marvellous tale, and fantasy, _La Chimère_, dances round
it, and calls to it with her false, flute-toned voice.  It may not hear
her now, but surely some day, when we are all bored to death with the
commonplace character of modern fiction, it will hearken to her and try
to borrow her wings.

‘And when that day dawns, or sunset reddens, how joyous we shall all be!
Facts will be regarded as discreditable, Truth will be found mourning
over her fetters, and Romance, with her temper of wonder, will return to
the land.  The very aspect of the world will change to our startled eyes.
Out of the sea will rise Behemoth and Leviathan, and sail round the
high-pooped galleys, as they do on the delightful maps of those ages when
books on geography were actually readable.  Dragons will wander about the
waste places, and the phoenix will soar from her nest of fire into the
air.  We shall lay our hands upon the basilisk, and see the jewel in the
toad’s head.  Champing his gilded oats, the Hippogriff will stand in our
stalls, and over our heads will float the Blue Bird singing of beautiful
and impossible things, of things that are lovely and that never happen,
of things that are not and that should be.  But before this comes to pass
we must cultivate the lost art of Lying.’

CYRIL.  Then we must entirely cultivate it at once.  But in order to
avoid making any error I want you to tell me briefly the doctrines of the
new æsthetics.

VIVIAN.  Briefly, then, they are these.  Art never expresses anything but
itself.  It has an independent life, just as Thought has, and develops
purely on its own lines.  It is not necessarily realistic in an age of
realism, nor spiritual in an age of faith.  So far from being the
creation of its time, it is usually in direct opposition to it, and the
only history that it preserves for us is the history of its own progress.
Sometimes it returns upon its footsteps, and revives some antique form,
as happened in the archaistic movement of late Greek Art, and in the
pre-Raphaelite movement of our own day.  At other times it entirely
anticipates its age, and produces in one century work that it takes
another century to understand, to appreciate and to enjoy.  In no case
does it reproduce its age.  To pass from the art of a time to the time
itself is the great mistake that all historians commit.

The second doctrine is this.  All bad art comes from returning to Life
and Nature, and elevating them into ideals.  Life and Nature may
sometimes be used as part of Art’s rough material, but before they are of
any real service to art they must be translated into artistic
conventions.  The moment Art surrenders its imaginative medium it
surrenders everything.  As a method Realism is a complete failure, and
the two things that every artist should avoid are modernity of form and
modernity of subject-matter.  To us, who live in the nineteenth century,
any century is a suitable subject for art except our own.  The only
beautiful things are the things that do not concern us.  It is, to have
the pleasure of quoting myself, exactly because Hecuba is nothing to us
that her sorrows are so suitable a motive for a tragedy.  Besides, it is
only the modern that ever becomes old-fashioned.  M. Zola sits down to
give us a picture of the Second Empire.  Who cares for the Second Empire
now?  It is out of date.  Life goes faster than Realism, but Romanticism
is always in front of Life.

The third doctrine is that Life imitates Art far more than Art imitates
Life.  This results not merely from Life’s imitative instinct, but from
the fact that the self-conscious aim of Life is to find expression, and
that Art offers it certain beautiful forms through which it may realise
that energy.  It is a theory that has never been put forward before, but
it is extremely fruitful, and throws an entirely new light upon the
history of Art.

It follows, as a corollary from this, that external Nature also imitates
Art.  The only effects that she can show us are effects that we have
already seen through poetry, or in paintings.  This is the secret of
Nature’s charm, as well as the explanation of Nature’s weakness.

The final revelation is that Lying, the telling of beautiful untrue
things, is the proper aim of Art.  But of this I think I have spoken at
sufficient length.  And now let us go out on the terrace, where ‘droops
the milk-white peacock like a ghost,’ while the evening star ‘washes the
dusk with silver.’  At twilight nature becomes a wonderfully suggestive
effect, and is not without loveliness, though perhaps its chief use is to
illustrate quotations from the poets.  Come!  We have talked long enough.




PEN, PENCIL AND POISON
A STUDY IN GREEN


IT has constantly been made a subject of reproach against artists and men
of letters that they are lacking in wholeness and completeness of nature.
As a rule this must necessarily be so.  That very concentration of vision
and intensity of purpose which is the characteristic of the artistic
temperament is in itself a mode of limitation.  To those who are
preoccupied with the beauty of form nothing else seems of much
importance.  Yet there are many exceptions to this rule.  Rubens served
as ambassador, and Goethe as state councillor, and Milton as Latin
secretary to Cromwell.  Sophocles held civic office in his own city; the
humourists, essayists, and novelists of modern America seem to desire
nothing better than to become the diplomatic representatives of their
country; and Charles Lamb’s friend, Thomas Griffiths Wainewright, the
subject of this brief memoir, though of an extremely artistic
temperament, followed many masters other than art, being not merely a
poet and a painter, an art-critic, an antiquarian, and a writer of prose,
an amateur of beautiful things, and a dilettante of things delightful,
but also a forger of no mean or ordinary capabilities, and as a subtle
and secret poisoner almost without rival in this or any age.

This remarkable man, so powerful with ‘pen, pencil and poison,’ as a
great poet of our own day has finely said of him, was born at Chiswick,
in 1794.  His father was the son of a distinguished solicitor of Gray’s
Inn and Hatton Garden.  His mother was the daughter of the celebrated Dr.
Griffiths, the editor and founder of the _Monthly Review_, the partner in
another literary speculation of Thomas Davis, that famous bookseller of
whom Johnson said that he was not a bookseller, but ‘a gentleman who
dealt in books,’ the friend of Goldsmith and Wedgwood, and one of the
most well-known men of his day.  Mrs. Wainewright died, in giving him
birth, at the early age of twenty-one, and an obituary notice in the
_Gentleman’s Magazine_ tells us of her ‘amiable disposition and numerous
accomplishments,’ and adds somewhat quaintly that ‘she is supposed to
have understood the writings of Mr. Locke as well as perhaps any person
of either sex now living.’  His father did not long survive his young
wife, and the little child seems to have been brought up by his
grandfather, and, on the death of the latter in 1803, by his uncle George
Edward Griffiths, whom he subsequently poisoned.  His boyhood was passed
at Linden House, Turnham Green, one of those many fine Georgian mansions
that have unfortunately disappeared before the inroads of the suburban
builder, and to its lovely gardens and well-timbered park he owed that
simple and impassioned love of nature which never left him all through
his life, and which made him so peculiarly susceptible to the spiritual
influences of Wordsworth’s poetry.  He went to school at Charles Burney’s
academy at Hammersmith.  Mr. Burney was the son of the historian of
music, and the near kinsman of the artistic lad who was destined to turn
out his most remarkable pupil.  He seems to have been a man of a good
deal of culture, and in after years Mr. Wainewright often spoke of him
with much affection as a philosopher, an archæologist, and an admirable
teacher who, while he valued the intellectual side of education, did not
forget the importance of early moral training.  It was under Mr. Burney
that he first developed his talent as an artist, and Mr. Hazlitt tells us
that a drawing-book which he used at school is still extant, and displays
great talent and natural feeling.  Indeed, painting was the first art
that fascinated him.  It was not till much later that he sought to find
expression by pen or poison.

Before this, however, he seems to have been carried away by boyish dreams
of the romance and chivalry of a soldier’s life, and to have become a
young guardsman.  But the reckless dissipated life of his companions
failed to satisfy the refined artistic temperament of one who was made
for other things.  In a short time he wearied of the service.  ‘Art,’ he
tells us, in words that still move many by their ardent sincerity and
strange fervour, ‘Art touched her renegade; by her pure and high
influence the noisome mists were purged; my feelings, parched, hot, and
tarnished, were renovated with cool, fresh bloom, simple, beautiful to
the simple-hearted.’  But Art was not the only cause of the change.  ‘The
writings of Wordsworth,’ he goes on to say, ‘did much towards calming the
confusing whirl necessarily incident to sudden mutations.  I wept over
them tears of happiness and gratitude.’  He accordingly left the army,
with its rough barrack-life and coarse mess-room tittle-tattle, and
returned to Linden House, full of this new-born enthusiasm for culture.
A severe illness, in which, to use his own words, he was ‘broken like a
vessel of clay,’ prostrated him for a time.  His delicately strung
organisation, however indifferent it might have been to inflicting pain
on others, was itself most keenly sensitive to pain.  He shrank from
suffering as a thing that mars and maims human life, and seems to have
wandered through that terrible valley of melancholia from which so many
great, perhaps greater, spirits have never emerged.  But he was
young—only twenty-five years of age—and he soon passed out of the ‘dead
black waters,’ as he called them, into the larger air of humanistic
culture.  As he was recovering from the illness that had led him almost
to the gates of death, he conceived the idea of taking up literature as
an art.  ‘I said with John Woodvil,’ he cries, ‘it were a life of gods to
dwell in such an element,’ to see and hear and write brave things:—

    ‘These high and gusty relishes of life
    Have no allayings of mortality.’

It is impossible not to feel that in this passage we have the utterance
of a man who had a true passion for letters.  ‘To see and hear and write
brave things,’ this was his aim.

Scott, the editor of the _London Magazine_, struck by the young man’s
genius, or under the influence of the strange fascination that he
exercised on every one who knew him, invited him to write a series of
articles on artistic subjects, and under a series of fanciful pseudonym
he began to contribute to the literature of his day.  _Janus
Weathercock_, _Egomet Bonmot_, and _Van Vinkvooms_, were some of the
grotesque masks under which he choose to hide his seriousness or to
reveal his levity.  A mask tells us more than a face.  These disguises
intensified his personality.  In an incredibly short time he seems to
have made his mark.  Charles Lamb speaks of ‘kind, light-hearted
Wainewright,’ whose prose is ‘capital.’  We hear of him entertaining
Macready, John Forster, Maginn, Talfourd, Sir Wentworth Dilke, the poet
John Clare, and others, at _a petit-dîner_.  Like Disraeli, he determined
to startle the town as a dandy, and his beautiful rings, his antique
cameo breast-pin, and his pale lemon-coloured kid gloves, were well
known, and indeed were regarded by Hazlitt as being the signs of a new
manner in literature: while his rich curly hair, fine eyes, and exquisite
white hands gave him the dangerous and delightful distinction of being
different from others.  There was something in him of Balzac’s Lucien de
Rubempré.  At times he reminds us of Julien Sorel.  De Quincey saw him
once.  It was at a dinner at Charles Lamb’s.  ‘Amongst the company, all
literary men, sat a murderer,’ he tells us, and he goes on to describe
how on that day he had been ill, and had hated the face of man and woman,
and yet found himself looking with intellectual interest across the table
at the young writer beneath whose affectations of manner there seemed to
him to lie so much unaffected sensibility, and speculates on ‘what sudden
growth of another interest’ would have changed his mood, had he known of
what terrible sin the guest to whom Lamb paid so much attention was even
then guilty.

His life-work falls naturally under the three heads suggested by Mr.
Swinburne, and it may be partly admitted that, if we set aside his
achievements in the sphere of poison, what he has actually left to us
hardly justifies his reputation.

But then it is only the Philistine who seeks to estimate a personality by
the vulgar test of production.  This young dandy sought to be somebody,
rather than to do something.  He recognised that Life itself is in art,
and has its modes of style no less than the arts that seek to express it.
Nor is his work without interest.  We hear of William Blake stopping in
the Royal Academy before one of his pictures and pronouncing it to be
‘very fine.’  His essays are prefiguring of much that has since been
realised.  He seems to have anticipated some of those accidents of modern
culture that are regarded by many as true essentials.  He writes about La
Gioconda, and early French poets and the Italian Renaissance.  He loves
Greek gems, and Persian carpets, and Elizabethan translations of _Cupid
and Psyche_, and the _Hypnerotomachia_, and book-binding and early
editions, and wide-margined proofs.  He is keenly sensitive to the value
of beautiful surroundings, and never wearies of describing to us the
rooms in which he lived, or would have liked to live.  He had that
curious love of green, which in individuals is always the sign of a
subtle artistic temperament, and in nations is said to denote a laxity,
if not a decadence of morals.  Like Baudelaire he was extremely fond of
cats, and with Gautier, he was fascinated by that ‘sweet marble monster’
of both sexes that we can still see at Florence and in the Louvre.

There is of course much in his descriptions, and his suggestions for
decoration, that shows that he did not entirely free himself from the
false taste of his time.  But it is clear that he was one of the first to
recognise what is, indeed, the very keynote of æsthetic eclecticism, I
mean the true harmony of all really beautiful things irrespective of age
or place, of school or manner.  He saw that in decorating a room, which
is to be, not a room for show, but a room to live in, we should never aim
at any archæological reconstruction of the past, nor burden ourselves
with any fanciful necessity for historical accuracy.  In this artistic
perception he was perfectly right.  All beautiful things belong to the
same age.

And so, in his own library, as he describes it, we find the delicate
fictile vase of the Greek, with its exquisitely painted figures and the
faint ΚΑΛΟΣ finely traced upon its side, and behind it hangs an engraving
of the ‘Delphic Sibyl’ of Michael Angelo, or of the ‘Pastoral’ of
Giorgione.  Here is a bit of Florentine majolica, and here a rude lamp
from some old Roman tomb. On the table lies a book of Hours, ‘cased in a
cover of solid silver gilt, wrought with quaint devices and studded with
small brilliants and rubies,’ and close by it ‘squats a little ugly
monster, a Lar, perhaps, dug up in the sunny fields of corn-bearing
Sicily.’  Some dark antique bronzes contrast with the pale gleam of two
noble _Christi Crucifixi_, one carved in ivory, the other moulded in
wax.’  He has his trays of Tassie’s gems, his tiny Louis-Quatorze
_bonbonnière_ with a miniature by Petitot, his highly prized
‘brown-biscuit teapots, filagree-worked,’ his citron morocco letter-case,
and his ‘pomona-green’ chair.

One can fancy him lying there in the midst of his books and casts and
engravings, a true virtuoso, a subtle connoisseur, turning over his fine
collection of Mare Antonios, and his Turner’s ‘Liber Studiorum,’ of which
he was a warm admirer, or examining with a magnifier some of his antique
gems and cameos, ‘the head of Alexander on an onyx of two strata,’ or
‘that superb _altissimo relievo_ on cornelian, Jupiter Ægiochus.’  He was
always a great amateur of engravings, and gives some very useful
suggestions as to the best means of forming a collection.  Indeed, while
fully appreciating modern art, he never lost sight of the importance of
reproductions of the great masterpieces of the past, and all that he says
about the value of plaster casts is quite admirable.

As an art-critic he concerned himself primarily with the complex
impressions produced by a work of art, and certainly the first step in
æsthetic criticism is to realise one’s own impressions.  He cared nothing
for abstract discussions on the nature of the Beautiful, and the
historical method, which has since yielded such rich fruit, did not
belong to his day, but he never lost sight of the great truth that Art’s
first appeal is neither to the intellect nor to the emotions, but purely
to the artistic temperament, and he more than once points out that this
temperament, this ‘taste,’ as he calls it, being unconsciously guided and
made perfect by frequent contact with the best work, becomes in the end a
form of right judgment.  Of course there are fashions in art just as
there are fashions in dress, and perhaps none of us can ever quite free
ourselves from the influence of custom and the influence of novelty.  He
certainly could not, and he frankly acknowledges how difficult it is to
form any fair estimate of contemporary work.  But, on the whole, his
taste was good and sound.  He admired Turner and Constable at a time when
they were not so much thought of as they are now, and saw that for the
highest landscape art we require more than ‘mere industry and accurate
transcription.’  Of Crome’s ‘Heath Scene near Norwich’ he remarks that it
shows ‘how much a subtle observation of the elements, in their wild
moods, does for a most uninteresting flat,’ and of the popular type of
landscape of his day he says that it is ‘simply an enumeration of hill
and dale, stumps of trees, shrubs, water, meadows, cottages and houses;
little more than topography, a kind of pictorial map-work; in which
rainbows, showers, mists, haloes, large beams shooting through rifted
clouds, storms, starlight, all the most valued materials of the real
painter, are not.’  He had a thorough dislike of what is obvious or
commonplace in art, and while he was charmed to entertain Wilkie at
dinner, he cared as little for Sir David’s pictures as he did for Mr.
Crabbe’s poems.  With the imitative and realistic tendencies of his day
he had no sympathy and he tells us frankly that his great admiration for
Fuseli was largely due to the fact that the little Swiss did not consider
it necessary that an artist should paint only what he sees.  The
qualities that he sought for in a picture were composition, beauty and
dignity of line, richness of colour, and imaginative power.  Upon the
other hand, he was not a doctrinaire.  ‘I hold that no work of art can be
tried otherwise than by laws deduced from itself: whether or not it be
consistent with itself is the question.’  This is one of his excellent
aphorisms.  And in criticising painters so different as Landseer and
Martin, Stothard and Etty, he shows that, to use a phrase now classical,
he is trying ‘to see the object as in itself it really is.’

However, as I pointed out before, he never feels quite at his ease in his
criticisms of contemporary work.  ‘The present,’ he says, ‘is about as
agreeable a confusion to me as Ariosto on the first perusal. . . . Modern
things dazzle me.  I must look at them through Time’s telescope.  Elia
complains that to him the merit of a MS. poem is uncertain; “print,” as
he excellently says, “settles it.”  Fifty years’ toning does the same
thing to a picture.’  He is happier when he is writing about Watteau and
Lancret, about Rubens and Giorgione, about Rembrandt, Corregio, and
Michael Angelo; happiest of all when he is writing about Greek things.
What is Gothic touched him very little, but classical art and the art of
the Renaissance were always dear to him.  He saw what our English school
could gain from a study of Greek models, and never wearies of pointing
out to the young student the artistic possibilities that lie dormant in
Hellenic marbles and Hellenic methods of work.  In his judgments on the
great Italian Masters, says De Quincey, ‘there seemed a tone of sincerity
and of native sensibility, as in one who spoke for himself, and was not
merely a copier from books.’  The highest praise that we can give to him
is that he tried to revive style as a conscious tradition.  But he saw
that no amount of art lectures or art congresses, or ‘plans for advancing
the fine arts,’ will ever produce this result.  The people, he says very
wisely, and in the true spirit of Toynbee Hall, must always have ‘the
best models constantly before their eyes.’

As is to be expected from one who was a painter, he is often extremely
technical in his art criticisms.  Of Tintoret’s ‘St. George delivering
the Egyptian Princess from the Dragon,’ he remarks:—

    The robe of Sabra, warmly glazed with Prussian blue, is relieved from
    the pale greenish background by a vermilion scarf; and the full hues
    of both are beautifully echoed, as it were, in a lower key by the
    purple-lake coloured stuffs and bluish iron armour of the saint,
    besides an ample balance to the vivid azure drapery on the foreground
    in the indigo shades of the wild wood surrounding the castle.

And elsewhere he talks learnedly of ‘a delicate Schiavone, various as a
tulip-bed, with rich broken tints,’ of ‘a glowing portrait, remarkable
for _morbidezza_, by the scarce Moroni,’ and of another picture being
‘pulpy in the carnations.’

But, as a rule, he deals with his impressions of the work as an artistic
whole, and tries to translate those impressions into words, to give, as
it were, the literary equivalent for the imaginative and mental effect.
He was one of the first to develop what has been called the
art-literature of the nineteenth century, that form of literature which
has found in Mr. Ruskin and Mr. Browning, its two most perfect exponents.
His description of Lancret’s _Repas Italien_, in which ‘a dark-haired
girl, “amorous of mischief,” lies on the daisy-powdered grass,’ is in
some respects very charming.  Here is his account of ‘The Crucifixion,’
by Rembrandt.  It is extremely characteristic of his style—
In this passage, written, the author tells us, ‘in awe and reverence,’
there is much that is terrible, and very much that is quite horrible, but
it is not without a certain crude form of power, or, at any rate, a
certain crude violence of words, a quality which this age should highly
appreciate, as it is its chief defect.  It is pleasanter, however, to
pass to this description of Giulio Romano’s ‘Cephalus and Procris’:—

Were this description carefully re-written, it would be quite admirable.
The conception of making a prose poem out of paint is excellent.  Much of
the best modern literature springs from the same aim.  In a very ugly and
sensible age, the arts borrow, not from life, but from each other.

His sympathies, too, were wonderfully varied.  In everything connected
with the stage, for instance, he was always extremely interested, and
strongly upheld the necessity for archæological accuracy in costume and
scene-painting.  ‘In art,’ he says in one of his essays, ‘whatever is
worth doing at all is worth doing well’; and he points out that once we
allow the intrusion of anachronisms, it becomes difficult to say where
the line is to be drawn.  In literature, again, like Lord Beaconsfield on
a famous occasion, he was ‘on the side of the angels.’  He was one of the
first to admire Keats and Shelley—‘the tremulously-sensitive and poetical
Shelley,’ as he calls him.  His admiration for Wordsworth was sincere and
profound.  He thoroughly appreciated William Blake.  One of the best
copies of the ‘Songs of Innocence and Experience’ that is now in
existence was wrought specially for him.  He loved Alain Chartier, and
Ronsard, and the Elizabethan dramatists, and Chaucer and Chapman, and
Petrarch.  And to him all the arts were one.  ‘Our critics,’ he remarks
with much wisdom, ‘seem hardly aware of the identity of the primal seeds
of poetry and painting, nor that any true advancement in the serious
study of one art co-generates a proportionate perfection in the other’;
and he says elsewhere that if a man who does not admire Michael Angelo
talks of his love for Milton, he is deceiving either himself or his
listeners.  To his fellow-contributors in the _London Magazine_ he was
always most generous, and praises Barry Cornwall, Allan Cunningham,
Hazlitt, Elton, and Leigh Hunt without anything of the malice of a
friend.  Some of his sketches of Charles Lamb are admirable in their way,
and, with the art of the true comedian, borrow their style from their
subject:—

One side of his literary career deserves especial notice.  Modern
journalism may be said to owe almost as much to him as to any man of the
early part of this century.  He was the pioneer of Asiatic prose, and
delighted in pictorial epithets and pompous exaggerations.  To have a
style so gorgeous that it conceals the subject is one of the highest
achievements of an important and much admired school of Fleet Street
leader-writers, and this school _Janus Weathercock_ may be said to have
invented.  He also saw that it was quite easy by continued reiteration to
make the public interested in his own personality, and in his purely
journalistic articles this extraordinary young man tells the world what
he had for dinner, where he gets his clothes, what wines he likes, and in
what state of health he is, just as if he were writing weekly notes for
some popular newspaper of our own time.  This being the least valuable
side of his work, is the one that has had the most obvious influence.  A
publicist, nowadays, is a man who bores the community with the details of
the illegalities of his private life.

Like most artificial people, he had a great love of nature.  ‘I hold
three things in high estimation,’ he says somewhere: ‘to sit lazily on an
eminence that commands a rich prospect; to be shadowed by thick trees
while the sun shines around me; and to enjoy solitude with the
consciousness of neighbourhood.  The country gives them all to me.’  He
writes about his wandering over fragrant furze and heath repeating
Collins’s ‘Ode to Evening,’ just to catch the fine quality of the moment;
about smothering his face ‘in a watery bed of cowslips, wet with May
dews’; and about the pleasure of seeing the sweet-breathed kine ‘pass
slowly homeward through the twilight,’ and hearing ‘the distant clank of
the sheep-bell.’  One phrase of his, ‘the polyanthus glowed in its cold
bed of earth, like a solitary picture of Giorgione on a dark oaken
panel,’ is curiously characteristic of his temperament, and this passage
is rather pretty in its way:—

 However, we must not forget that the cultivated young man who penned
these lines, and who was so susceptible to Wordsworthian influences, was
also, as I said at the beginning of this memoir, one of the most subtle
and secret poisoners of this or any age.  How he first became fascinated
by this strange sin he does not tell us, and the diary in which he
carefully noted the results of his terrible experiments and the methods
that he adopted, has unfortunately been lost to us.  Even in later days,
too, he was always reticent on the matter, and preferred to speak about
‘The Excursion,’ and the ‘Poems founded on the Affections.’  There is no
doubt, however, that the poison that he used was strychnine.  In one of
the beautiful rings of which he was so proud, and which served to show
off the fine modelling of his delicate ivory hands, he used to carry
crystals of the Indian _nux vomica_, a poison, one of his biographers
tells us, ‘nearly tasteless, difficult of discovery, and capable of
almost infinite dilution.’  His murders, says De Quincey, were more than
were ever made known judicially.  This is no doubt so, and some of them
are worthy of mention.  His first victim was his uncle, Mr. Thomas
Griffiths.  He poisoned him in 1829 to gain possession of Linden House, a
place to which he had always been very much attached.  In the August of
the next year he poisoned Mrs. Abercrombie, his wife’s mother, and in the
following December he poisoned the lovely Helen Abercrombie, his
sister-in-law.  Why he murdered Mrs. Abercrombie is not ascertained.  It
may have been for a caprice, or to quicken some hideous sense of power
that was in him, or because she suspected something, or for no reason.
But the murder of Helen Abercrombie was carried out by himself and his
wife for the sake of a sum of about £18,000, for which they had insured
her life in various offices.  The circumstances were as follows.  On the
12th of December, he and his wife and child came up to London from Linden
House, and took lodgings at No. 12 Conduit Street, Regent Street.  With
them were the two sisters, Helen and Madeleine Abercrombie.  On the
evening of the 14th they all went to the play, and at supper that night
Helen sickened.  The next day she was extremely ill, and Dr. Locock, of
Hanover Square, was called in to attend her.  She lived till Monday, the
20th, when, after the doctor’s morning visit, Mr. and Mrs. Wainewright
brought her some poisoned jelly, and then went out for a walk.  When they
returned Helen Abercrombie was dead.  She was about twenty years of age,
a tall graceful girl with fair hair.  A very charming red-chalk drawing
of her by her brother-in-law is still in existence, and shows how much
his style as an artist was influenced by Sir Thomas Lawrence, a painter
for whose work he had always entertained a great admiration.  De Quincey
says that Mrs. Wainewright was not really privy to the murder.  Let us
hope that she was not.  Sin should be solitary, and have no accomplices.

The insurance companies, suspecting the real facts of the case, declined
to pay the policy on the technical ground of misrepresentation and want
of interest, and, with curious courage, the poisoner entered an action in
the Court of Chancery against the Imperial, it being agreed that one
decision should govern all the cases.  The trial, however, did not come
on for five years, when, after one disagreement, a verdict was ultimately
given in the companies’ favour.  The judge on the occasion was Lord
Abinger.  _Egomet Bonmot_ was represented by Mr. Erle and Sir William
Follet, and the Attorney-General and Sir Frederick Pollock appeared for
the other side.  The plaintiff, unfortunately, was unable to be present
at either of the trials.  The refusal of the companies to give him the
£18,000 had placed him in a position of most painful pecuniary
embarrassment.  Indeed, a few months after the murder of Helen
Abercrombie, he had been actually arrested for debt in the streets of
London while he was serenading the pretty daughter of one of his friends.
This difficulty was got over at the time, but shortly afterwards he
thought it better to go abroad till he could come to some practical
arrangement with his creditors.  He accordingly went to Boulogne on a
visit to the father of the young lady in question, and while he was there
induced him to insure his life with the Pelican Company for £3000.  As
soon as the necessary formalities had been gone through and the policy
executed, he dropped some crystals of strychnine into his coffee as they
sat together one evening after dinner.  He himself did not gain any
monetary advantage by doing this.  His aim was simply to revenge himself
on the first office that had refused to pay him the price of his sin.
His friend died the next day in his presence, and he left Boulogne at
once for a sketching tour through the most picturesque parts of Brittany,
and was for some time the guest of an old French gentleman, who had a
beautiful country house at St. Omer.  From this he moved to Paris, where
he remained for several years, living in luxury, some say, while others
talk of his ‘skulking with poison in his pocket, and being dreaded by all
who knew him.’  In 1837 he returned to England privately.  Some strange
mad fascination brought him back.  He followed a woman whom he loved.

It was the month of June, and he was staying at one of the hotels in
Covent Garden.  His sitting-room was on the ground floor, and he
prudently kept the blinds down for fear of being seen.  Thirteen years
before, when he was making his fine collection of majolica and Marc
Antonios, he had forged the names of his trustees to a power of attorney,
which enabled him to get possession of some of the money which he had
inherited from his mother, and had brought into marriage settlement.  He
knew that this forgery had been discovered, and that by returning to
England he was imperilling his life.  Yet he returned.  Should one
wonder?  It was said that the woman was very beautiful.  Besides, she did
not love him.

It was by a mere accident that he was discovered.  A noise in the street
attracted his attention, and, in his artistic interest in modern life, he
pushed aside the blind for a moment.  Some one outside called out,
‘That’s Wainewright, the Bank-forger.’  It was Forrester, the Bow Street
runner.

On the 5th of July he was brought up at the Old Bailey.  The following
report of the proceedings appeared in the _Times_:—

He was taken back to Newgate, preparatory to his removal to the colonies.
In a fanciful passage in one of his early essays he had fancied himself
‘lying in Horsemonger Gaol under sentence of death’ for having been
unable to resist the temptation of stealing some Marc Antonios from the
British Museum in order to complete his collection.  The sentence now
passed on him was to a man of his culture a form of death.  He complained
bitterly of it to his friends, and pointed out, with a good deal of
reason, some people may fancy, that the money was practically his own,
having come to him from his mother, and that the forgery, such as it was,
had been committed thirteen years before, which, to use his own phrase,
was at least a _circonstance attenuante_.  The permanence of personality
is a very subtle metaphysical problem, and certainly the English law
solves the question in an extremely rough-and-ready manner.  There is,
however, something dramatic in the fact that this heavy punishment was
inflicted on him for what, if we remember his fatal influence on the
prose of modern journalism, was certainly not the worst of all his sins.

While he was in gaol, Dickens, Macready, and Hablot Browne came across
him by chance.  They had been going over the prisons of London, searching
for artistic effects, and in Newgate they suddenly caught sight of
Wainewright.  He met them with a defiant stare, Forster tells us, but
Macready was ‘horrified to recognise a man familiarly known to him in
former years, and at whose table he had dined.’

Others had more curiosity, and his cell was for some time a kind of
fashionable lounge.  Many men of letters went down to visit their old
literary comrade.  But he was no longer the kind light-hearted Janus whom
Charles Lamb admired.  He seems to have grown quite cynical.

To the agent of an insurance company who was visiting him one afternoon,
and thought he would improve the occasion by pointing out that, after
all, crime was a bad speculation, he replied: ‘Sir, you City men enter on
your speculations, and take the chances of them.  Some of your
speculations succeed, some fail.  Mine happen to have failed, yours
happen to have succeeded.  That is the only difference, sir, between my
visitor and me.  But, sir, I will tell you one thing in which I have
succeeded to the last.  I have been determined through life to hold the
position of a gentleman.  I have always done so.  I do so still.  It is
the custom of this place that each of the inmates of a cell shall take
his morning’s turn of sweeping it out.  I occupy a cell with a bricklayer
and a sweep, but they never offer me the broom!’  When a friend
reproached him with the murder of Helen Abercrombie he shrugged his
shoulders and said, ‘Yes; it was a dreadful thing to do, but she had very
thick ankles.’

From Newgate he was brought to the hulks at Portsmouth, and sent from
there in the _Susan_ to Van Diemen’s Land along with three hundred other
convicts.  The voyage seems to have been most distasteful to him, and in
a letter written to a friend he spoke bitterly about the ignominy of ‘the
companion of poets and artists’ being compelled to associate with
‘country bumpkins.’  The phrase that he applies to his companions need
not surprise us.  Crime in England is rarely the result of sin.  It is
nearly always the result of starvation.  There was probably no one on
board in whom he would have found a sympathetic listener, or even a
psychologically interesting nature.

His love of art, however, never deserted him.  At Hobart Town he started
a studio, and returned to sketching and portrait-painting, and his
conversation and manners seem not to have lost their charm.  Nor did he
give up his habit of poisoning, and there are two cases on record in
which he tried to make away with people who had offended him.  But his
hand seems to have lost its cunning.  Both of his attempts were complete
failures, and in 1844, being thoroughly dissatisfied with Tasmanian
society, he presented a memorial to the governor of the settlement, Sir
John Eardley Wilmot, praying for a ticket-of-leave.  In it he speaks of
himself as being ‘tormented by ideas struggling for outward form and
realisation, barred up from increase of knowledge, and deprived of the
exercise of profitable or even of decorous speech.’  His request,
however, was refused, and the associate of Coleridge consoled himself by
making those marvellous _Paradis Artificiels_ whose secret is only known
to the eaters of opium.  In 1852 he died of apoplexy, his sole living
companion being a cat, for which he had evinced at extraordinary
affection.

His crimes seem to have had an important effect upon his art.  They gave
a strong personality to his style, a quality that his early work
certainly lacked.  In a note to the _Life of Dickens_, Forster mentions
that in 1847 Lady Blessington received from her brother, Major Power, who
held a military appointment at Hobart Town, an oil portrait of a young
lady from his clever brush; and it is said that ‘he had contrived to put
the expression of his own wickedness into the portrait of a nice,
kind-hearted girl.’  M. Zola, in one of his novels, tells us of a young
man who, having committed a murder, takes to art, and paints greenish
impressionist portraits of perfectly respectable people, all of which
bear a curious resemblance to his victim.  The development of Mr.
Wainewright’s style seems to me far more subtle and suggestive.  One can
fancy an intense personality being created out of sin.

This strange and fascinating figure that for a few years dazzled literary
London, and made so brilliant a _début_ in life and letters, is
undoubtedly a most interesting study.  Mr. W. Carew Hazlitt, his latest
biographer, to whom I am indebted for many of the facts contained in this
memoir, and whose little book is, indeed, quite invaluable in its way, is
of opinion that his love of art and nature was a mere pretence and
assumption, and others have denied to him all literary power.  This seems
to me a shallow, or at least a mistaken, view.  The fact of a man being a
poisoner is nothing against his prose.  The domestic virtues are not the
true basis of art, though they may serve as an excellent advertisement
for second-rate artists.  It is possible that De Quincey exaggerated his
critical powers, and I cannot help saying again that there is much in his
published works that is too familiar, too common, too journalistic, in
the bad sense of that bad word.  Here and there he is distinctly vulgar
in expression, and he is always lacking in the self-restraint of the true
artist.  But for some of his faults we must blame the time in which he
lived, and, after all, prose that Charles Lamb thought ‘capital’ has no
small historic interest.  That he had a sincere love of art and nature
seems to me quite certain.  There is no essential incongruity between
crime and culture.  We cannot re-write the whole of history for the
purpose of gratifying our moral sense of what should be.

Of course, he is far too close to our own time for us to be able to form
any purely artistic judgment about him.  It is impossible not to feel a
strong prejudice against a man who might have poisoned Lord Tennyson, or
Mr. Gladstone, or the Master of Balliol.  But had the man worn a costume
and spoken a language different from our own, had he lived in imperial
Rome, or at the time of the Italian Renaissance, or in Spain in the
seventeenth century, or in any land or any century but this century and
this land, we would be quite able to arrive at a perfectly unprejudiced
estimate of his position and value.  I know that there are many
historians, or at least writers on historical subjects, who still think
it necessary to apply moral judgments to history, and who distribute
their praise or blame with the solemn complacency of a successful
schoolmaster.  This, however, is a foolish habit, and merely shows that
the moral instinct can be brought to such a pitch of perfection that it
will make its appearance wherever it is not required.  Nobody with the
true historical sense ever dreams of blaming Nero, or scolding Tiberius,
or censuring Cæsar Borgia.  These personages have become like the puppets
of a play.  They may fill us with terror, or horror, or wonder, but they
do not harm us.  They are not in immediate relation to us.  We have
nothing to fear from them.  They have passed into the sphere of art and
science, and neither art nor science knows anything of moral approval or
disapproval.  And so it may be some day with Charles Lamb’s friend.  At
present I feel that he is just a little too modern to be treated in that
fine spirit of disinterested curiosity to which we owe so many charming
studies of the great criminals of the Italian Renaissance from the pens
of Mr. John Addington Symonds, Miss A. Mary F. Robinson, Miss Vernon Lee,
and other distinguished writers.  However, Art has not forgotten him.  He
is the hero of Dickens’s _Hunted Down_, the Varney of Bulwer’s
_Lucretia_; and it is gratifying to note that fiction has paid some
homage to one who was so powerful with ‘pen, pencil and poison.’  To be
suggestive for fiction is to be of more importance than a fact.




THE CRITIC AS ARTIST
WITH SOME REMARKS UPON THE
IMPORTANCE OF DOING NOTHING


GILBERT (_at the Piano_).  My dear Ernest, what are you laughing at?

ERNEST (_looking up_).  At a capital story that I have just come across
in this volume of Reminiscences that I have found on your table.

GILBERT.  What is the book?  Ah! I see.  I have not read it yet.  Is it
good?

ERNEST.  Well, while you have been playing, I have been turning over the
pages with some amusement, though, as a rule, I dislike modern memoirs.
They are generally written by people who have either entirely lost their
memories, or have never done anything worth remembering; which, however,
is, no doubt, the true explanation of their popularity, as the English
public always feels perfectly at its ease when a mediocrity is talking to
it.

GILBERT.  Yes: the public is wonderfully tolerant.  It forgives
everything except genius.  But I must confess that I like all memoirs.  I
like them for their form, just as much as for their matter.  In
literature mere egotism is delightful.  It is what fascinates us in the
letters of personalities so different as Cicero and Balzac, Flaubert and
Berlioz, Byron and Madame de Sévigné.  Whenever we come across it, and,
strangely enough, it is rather rare, we cannot but welcome it, and do not
easily forget it.  Humanity will always love Rousseau for having
confessed his sins, not to a priest, but to the world, and the couchant
nymphs that Cellini wrought in bronze for the castle of King Francis, the
green and gold Perseus, even, that in the open Loggia at Florence shows
the moon the dead terror that once turned life to stone, have not given
it more pleasure than has that autobiography in which the supreme
scoundrel of the Renaissance relates the story of his splendour and his
shame.  The opinions, the character, the achievements of the man, matter
very little.  He may be a sceptic like the gentle Sieur de Montaigne, or
a saint like the bitter son of Monica, but when he tells us his own
secrets he can always charm our ears to listening and our lips to
silence.  The mode of thought that Cardinal Newman represented—if that
can be called a mode of thought which seeks to solve intellectual
problems by a denial of the supremacy of the intellect—may not, cannot, I
think, survive.  But the world will never weary of watching that troubled
soul in its progress from darkness to darkness.  The lonely church at
Littlemore, where ‘the breath of the morning is damp, and worshippers are
few,’ will always be dear to it, and whenever men see the yellow
snapdragon blossoming on the wall of Trinity they will think of that
gracious undergraduate who saw in the flower’s sure recurrence a prophecy
that he would abide for ever with the Benign Mother of his days—a
prophecy that Faith, in her wisdom or her folly, suffered not to be
fulfilled.  Yes; autobiography is irresistible.  Poor, silly, conceited
Mr. Secretary Pepys has chattered his way into the circle of the
Immortals, and, conscious that indiscretion is the better part of valour,
bustles about among them in that ‘shaggy purple gown with gold buttons
and looped lace’ which he is so fond of describing to us, perfectly at
his ease, and prattling, to his own and our infinite pleasure, of the
Indian blue petticoat that he bought for his wife, of the ‘good hog’s
hars-let,’ and the ‘pleasant French fricassee of veal’ that he loved to
eat, of his game of bowls with Will Joyce, and his ‘gadding after
beauties,’ and his reciting of _Hamlet_ on a Sunday, and his playing of
the viol on week days, and other wicked or trivial things.  Even in
actual life egotism is not without its attractions.  When people talk to
us about others they are usually dull.  When they talk to us about
themselves they are nearly always interesting, and if one could shut them
up, when they become wearisome, as easily as one can shut up a book of
which one has grown wearied, they would be perfect absolutely.

ERNEST.  There is much virtue in that If, as Touchstone would say.  But
do you seriously propose that every man should become his own Boswell?
What would become of our industrious compilers of Lives and Recollections
in that case?

GILBERT.  What has become of them?  They are the pest of the age, nothing
more and nothing less.  Every great man nowadays has his disciples, and
it is always Judas who writes the biography.

ERNEST.  My dear fellow!

GILBERT.  I am afraid it is true.  Formerly we used to canonise our
heroes.  The modern method is to vulgarise them.  Cheap editions of great
books may be delightful, but cheap editions of great men are absolutely
detestable.

ERNEST.  May I ask, Gilbert, to whom you allude?

GILBERT.  Oh! to all our second-rate _littérateurs_.  We are overrun by a
set of people who, when poet or painter passes away, arrive at the house
along with the undertaker, and forget that their one duty is to behave as
mutes.  But we won’t talk about them.  They are the mere body-snatchers
of literature.  The dust is given to one, and the ashes to another, and
the soul is out of their reach.  And now, let me play Chopin to you, or
Dvorák?  Shall I play you a fantasy by Dvorák?  He writes passionate,
curiously-coloured things.

ERNEST.  No; I don’t want music just at present.  It is far too
indefinite.  Besides, I took the Baroness Bernstein down to dinner last
night, and, though absolutely charming in every other respect, she
insisted on discussing music as if it were actually written in the German
language.  Now, whatever music sounds like I am glad to say that it does
not sound in the smallest degree like German.  There are forms of
patriotism that are really quite degrading.  No; Gilbert, don’t play any
more.  Turn round and talk to me.  Talk to me till the white-horned day
comes into the room.  There is something in your voice that is wonderful.

GILBERT (_rising from the piano_).  I am not in a mood for talking
to-night.  I really am not.  How horrid of you to smile!  Where are the
cigarettes?  Thanks.  How exquisite these single daffodils are!  They
seem to be made of amber and cool ivory.  They are like Greek things of
the best period.  What was the story in the confessions of the remorseful
Academician that made you laugh?  Tell it to me.  After playing Chopin, I
feel as if I had been weeping over sins that I had never committed, and
mourning over tragedies that were not my own.  Music always seems to me
to produce that effect.  It creates for one a past of which one has been
ignorant, and fills one with a sense of sorrows that have been hidden
from one’s tears.  I can fancy a man who had led a perfectly commonplace
life, hearing by chance some curious piece of music, and suddenly
discovering that his soul, without his being conscious of it, had passed
through terrible experiences, and known fearful joys, or wild romantic
loves, or great renunciations.  And so tell me this story, Ernest.  I
want to be amused.

ERNEST.  Oh!  I don’t know that it is of any importance.  But I thought
it a really admirable illustration of the true value of ordinary
art-criticism.  It seems that a lady once gravely asked the remorseful
Academician, as you call him, if his celebrated picture of ‘A Spring-Day
at Whiteley’s,’ or, ‘Waiting for the Last Omnibus,’ or some subject of
that kind, was all painted by hand?

GILBERT.  And was it?

ERNEST.  You are quite incorrigible.  But, seriously speaking, what is
the use of art-criticism?  Why cannot the artist be left alone, to create
a new world if he wishes it, or, if not, to shadow forth the world which
we already know, and of which, I fancy, we would each one of us be
wearied if Art, with her fine spirit of choice and delicate instinct of
selection, did not, as it were, purify it for us, and give to it a
momentary perfection.  It seems to me that the imagination spreads, or
should spread, a solitude around it, and works best in silence and in
isolation.  Why should the artist be troubled by the shrill clamour of
criticism?  Why should those who cannot create take upon themselves to
estimate the value of creative work?  What can they know about it?  If a
man’s work is easy to understand, an explanation is unnecessary. . . .

GILBERT.  And if his work is incomprehensible, an explanation is wicked.

ERNEST.  I did not say that.

GILBERT.  Ah! but you should have.  Nowadays, we have so few mysteries
left to us that we cannot afford to part with one of them.  The members
of the Browning Society, like the theologians of the Broad Church Party,
or the authors of Mr. Walter Scott’s Great Writers Series, seem to me to
spend their time in trying to explain their divinity away.  Where one had
hoped that Browning was a mystic they have sought to show that he was
simply inarticulate.  Where one had fancied that he had something to
conceal, they have proved that he had but little to reveal.  But I speak
merely of his incoherent work.  Taken as a whole the man was great.  He
did not belong to the Olympians, and had all the incompleteness of the
Titan.  He did not survey, and it was but rarely that he could sing.  His
work is marred by struggle, violence and effort, and he passed not from
emotion to form, but from thought to chaos.  Still, he was great.  He has
been called a thinker, and was certainly a man who was always thinking,
and always thinking aloud; but it was not thought that fascinated him,
but rather the processes by which thought moves.  It was the machine he
loved, not what the machine makes.  The method by which the fool arrives
at his folly was as dear to him as the ultimate wisdom of the wise.  So
much, indeed, did the subtle mechanism of mind fascinate him that he
despised language, or looked upon it as an incomplete instrument of
expression.  Rhyme, that exquisite echo which in the Muse’s hollow hill
creates and answers its own voice; rhyme, which in the hands of the real
artist becomes not merely a material element of metrical beauty, but a
spiritual element of thought and passion also, waking a new mood, it may
be, or stirring a fresh train of ideas, or opening by mere sweetness and
suggestion of sound some golden door at which the Imagination itself had
knocked in vain; rhyme, which can turn man’s utterance to the speech of
gods; rhyme, the one chord we have added to the Greek lyre, became in
Robert Browning’s hands a grotesque, misshapen thing, which at times made
him masquerade in poetry as a low comedian, and ride Pegasus too often
with his tongue in his cheek.  There are moments when he wounds us by
monstrous music.  Nay, if he can only get his music by breaking the
strings of his lute, he breaks them, and they snap in discord, and no
Athenian tettix, making melody from tremulous wings, lights on the ivory
horn to make the movement perfect, or the interval less harsh.  Yet, he
was great: and though he turned language into ignoble clay, he made from
it men and women that live.  He is the most Shakespearian creature since
Shakespeare.  If Shakespeare could sing with myriad lips, Browning could
stammer through a thousand mouths.  Even now, as I am speaking, and
speaking not against him but for him, there glides through the room the
pageant of his persons.  There, creeps Fra Lippo Lippi with his cheeks
still burning from some girl’s hot kiss.  There, stands dread Saul with
the lordly male-sapphires gleaming in his turban.  Mildred Tresham is
there, and the Spanish monk, yellow with hatred, and Blougram, and Ben
Ezra, and the Bishop of St. Praxed’s.  The spawn of Setebos gibbers in
the corner, and Sebald, hearing Pippa pass by, looks on Ottima’s haggard
face, and loathes her and his own sin, and himself.  Pale as the white
satin of his doublet, the melancholy king watches with dreamy treacherous
eyes too loyal Strafford pass forth to his doom, and Andrea shudders as
he hears the cousins whistle in the garden, and bids his perfect wife go
down.  Yes, Browning was great.  And as what will he be remembered?  As a
poet?  Ah, not as a poet!  He will be remembered as a writer of fiction,
as the most supreme writer of fiction, it may be, that we have ever had.
His sense of dramatic situation was unrivalled, and, if he could not
answer his own problems, he could at least put problems forth, and what
more should an artist do?  Considered from the point of view of a creator
of character he ranks next to him who made Hamlet.  Had he been
articulate, he might have sat beside him.  The only man who can touch the
hem of his garment is George Meredith.  Meredith is a prose Browning, and
so is Browning. He used poetry as a medium for writing in prose.

ERNEST.  There is something in what you say, but there is not everything
in what you say.  In many points you are unjust.

GILBERT.  It is difficult not to be unjust to what one loves.  But let us
return to the particular point at issue.  What was it that you said?

ERNEST.  Simply this: that in the best days of art there were no
art-critics.

GILBERT.  I seem to have heard that observation before, Ernest.  It has
all the vitality of error and all the tediousness of an old friend.

ERNEST.  It is true.  Yes: there is no use your tossing your head in that
petulant manner.  It is quite true.  In the best days of art there were
no art-critics.  The sculptor hewed from the marble block the great
white-limbed Hermes that slept within it.  The waxers and gilders of
images gave tone and texture to the statue, and the world, when it saw
it, worshipped and was dumb.  He poured the glowing bronze into the mould
of sand, and the river of red metal cooled into noble curves and took the
impress of the body of a god.  With enamel or polished jewels he gave
sight to the sightless eyes.  The hyacinth-like curls grew crisp beneath
his graver.  And when, in some dim frescoed fane, or pillared sunlit
portico, the child of Leto stood upon his pedestal, those who passed by,
δια λαμπροτάτου βαίνοντες αβρως αιθέρος, became conscious of a new
influence that had come across their lives, and dreamily, or with a sense
of strange and quickening joy, went to their homes or daily labour, or
wandered, it may be, through the city gates to that nymph-haunted meadow
where young Phædrus bathed his feet, and, lying there on the soft grass,
beneath the tall wind—whispering planes and flowering _agnus castus_,
began to think of the wonder of beauty, and grew silent with unaccustomed
awe.  In those days the artist was free.  From the river valley he took
the fine clay in his fingers, and with a little tool of wood or bone,
fashioned it into forms so exquisite that the people gave them to the
dead as their playthings, and we find them still in the dusty tombs on
the yellow hillside by Tanagra, with the faint gold and the fading
crimson still lingering about hair and lips and raiment.  On a wall of
fresh plaster, stained with bright sandyx or mixed with milk and saffron,
he pictured one who trod with tired feet the purple white-starred fields
of asphodel, one ‘in whose eyelids lay the whole of the Trojan War,’
Polyxena, the daughter of Priam; or figured Odysseus, the wise and
cunning, bound by tight cords to the mast-step, that he might listen
without hurt to the singing of the Sirens, or wandering by the clear
river of Acheron, where the ghosts of fishes flitted over the pebbly bed;
or showed the Persian in trews and mitre flying before the Greek at
Marathon, or the galleys clashing their beaks of brass in the little
Salaminian bay.  He drew with silver-point and charcoal upon parchment
and prepared cedar.  Upon ivory and rose-coloured terracotta he painted
with wax, making the wax fluid with juice of olives, and with heated
irons making it firm.  Panel and marble and linen canvas became wonderful
as his brush swept across them; and life seeing her own image, was still,
and dared not speak.  All life, indeed, was his, from the merchants
seated in the market-place to the cloaked shepherd lying on the hill;
from the nymph hidden in the laurels and the faun that pipes at noon, to
the king whom, in long green-curtained litter, slaves bore upon
oil-bright shoulders, and fanned with peacock fans.  Men and women, with
pleasure or sorrow in their faces, passed before him.  He watched them,
and their secret became his.  Through form and colour he re-created a
world.

All subtle arts belonged to him also.  He held the gem against the
revolving disk, and the amethyst became the purple couch for Adonis, and
across the veined sardonyx sped Artemis with her hounds.  He beat out the
gold into roses, and strung them together for necklace or armlet.  He
beat out the gold into wreaths for the conqueror’s helmet, or into
palmates for the Tyrian robe, or into masks for the royal dead.  On the
back of the silver mirror he graved Thetis borne by her Nereids, or
love-sick Phædra with her nurse, or Persephone, weary of memory, putting
poppies in her hair.  The potter sat in his shed, and, flower-like from
the silent wheel, the vase rose up beneath his hands.  He decorated the
base and stem and ears with pattern of dainty olive-leaf, or foliated
acanthus, or curved and crested wave.  Then in black or red he painted
lads wrestling, or in the race: knights in full armour, with strange
heraldic shields and curious visors, leaning from shell-shaped chariot
over rearing steeds: the gods seated at the feast or working their
miracles: the heroes in their victory or in their pain.  Sometimes he
would etch in thin vermilion lines upon a ground of white the languid
bridegroom and his bride, with Eros hovering round them—an Eros like one
of Donatello’s angels, a little laughing thing with gilded or with azure
wings.  On the curved side he would write the name of his friend.  ΚΑΛΟΣ
ΑΛΚΙΒΙΑΔΗΣ or ΚΑΛΟΣ ΧΑΡΜΙΔΗΣ tells us the story of his days.  Again, on
the rim of the wide flat cup he would draw the stag browsing, or the lion
at rest, as his fancy willed it.  From the tiny perfume-bottle laughed
Aphrodite at her toilet, and, with bare-limbed Mænads in his train,
Dionysus danced round the wine-jar on naked must-stained feet, while,
satyr-like, the old Silenus sprawled upon the bloated skins, or shook
that magic spear which was tipped with a fretted fir-cone, and wreathed
with dark ivy.  And no one came to trouble the artist at his work.  No
irresponsible chatter disturbed him.  He was not worried by opinions.  By
the Ilyssus, says Arnold somewhere, there was no Higginbotham.  By the
Ilyssus, my dear Gilbert, there were no silly art congresses bringing
provincialism to the provinces and teaching the mediocrity how to mouth.
By the Ilyssus there were no tedious magazines about art, in which the
industrious prattle of what they do not understand.  On the reed-grown
banks of that little stream strutted no ridiculous journalism
monopolising the seat of judgment when it should be apologising in the
dock.  The Greeks had no art-critics.

GILBERT.  Ernest, you are quite delightful, but your views are terribly
unsound.  I am afraid that you have been listening to the conversation of
some one older than yourself.  That is always a dangerous thing to do,
and if you allow it to degenerate into a habit you will find it
absolutely fatal to any intellectual development.  As for modern
journalism, it is not my business to defend it.  It justifies its own
existence by the great Darwinian principle of the survival of the
vulgarest.  I have merely to do with literature.

ERNEST.  But what is the difference between literature and journalism?

GILBERT.  Oh! journalism is unreadable, and literature is not read.  That
is all.  But with regard to your statement that the Greeks had no
art-critics, I assure you that is quite absurd.  It would be more just to
say that the Greeks were a nation of art-critics.

ERNEST.  Really?

GILBERT.  Yes, a nation of art-critics.  But I don’t wish to destroy the
delightfully unreal picture that you have drawn of the relation of the
Hellenic artist to the intellectual spirit of his age.  To give an
accurate description of what has never occurred is not merely the proper
occupation of the historian, but the inalienable privilege of any man of
parts and culture.  Still less do I desire to talk learnedly.  Learned
conversation is either the affectation of the ignorant or the profession
of the mentally unemployed.  And, as for what is called improving
conversation, that is merely the foolish method by which the still more
foolish philanthropist feebly tries to disarm the just rancour of the
criminal classes.  No: let me play to you some mad scarlet thing by
Dvorák.  The pallid figures on the tapestry are smiling at us, and the
heavy eyelids of my bronze Narcissus are folded in sleep.  Don’t let us
discuss anything solemnly.  I am but too conscious of the fact that we
are born in an age when only the dull are treated seriously, and I live
in terror of not being misunderstood.  Don’t degrade me into the position
of giving you useful information.  Education is an admirable thing, but
it is well to remember from time to time that nothing that is worth
knowing can be taught.  Through the parted curtains of the window I see
the moon like a clipped piece of silver.  Like gilded bees the stars
cluster round her.  The sky is a hard hollow sapphire.  Let us go out
into the night.  Thought is wonderful, but adventure is more wonderful
still.  Who knows but we may meet Prince Florizel of Bohemia, and hear
the fair Cuban tell us that she is not what she seems?

ERNEST.  You are horribly wilful.  I insist on your discussing this
matter with me.  You have said that the Greeks were a nation of
art-critics.  What art-criticism have they left us?

GILBERT.  My dear Ernest, even if not a single fragment of art-criticism
had come down to us from Hellenic or Hellenistic days, it would be none
the less true that the Greeks were a nation of art-critics, and that they
invented the criticism of art just as they invented the criticism of
everything else.  For, after all, what is our primary debt to the Greeks?
Simply the critical spirit.  And, this spirit, which they exercised on
questions of religion and science, of ethics and metaphysics, of politics
and education, they exercised on questions of art also, and, indeed, of
the two supreme and highest arts, they have left us the most flawless
system of criticism that the world has ever seen.

ERNEST.  But what are the two supreme and highest arts?

GILBERT.  Life and Literature, life and the perfect expression of life.
The principles of the former, as laid down by the Greeks, we may not
realise in an age so marred by false ideals as our own.  The principles
of the latter, as they laid them down, are, in many cases, so subtle that
we can hardly understand them.  Recognising that the most perfect art is
that which most fully mirrors man in all his infinite variety, they
elaborated the criticism of language, considered in the light of the mere
material of that art, to a point to which we, with our accentual system
of reasonable or emotional emphasis, can barely if at all attain;
studying, for instance, the metrical movements of a prose as
scientifically as a modern musician studies harmony and counterpoint,
and, I need hardly say, with much keener æsthetic instinct.  In this they
were right, as they were right in all things.  Since the introduction of
printing, and the fatal development of the habit of reading amongst the
middle and lower classes of this country, there has been a tendency in
literature to appeal more and more to the eye, and less and less to the
ear which is really the sense which, from the standpoint of pure art, it
should seek to please, and by whose canons of pleasure it should abide
always.  Even the work of Mr. Pater, who is, on the whole, the most
perfect master of English prose now creating amongst us, is often far
more like a piece of mosaic than a passage in music, and seems, here and
there, to lack the true rhythmical life of words and the fine freedom and
richness of effect that such rhythmical life produces.  We, in fact, have
made writing a definite mode of composition, and have treated it as a
form of elaborate design.  The Greeks, upon the other hand, regarded
writing simply as a method of chronicling.  Their test was always the
spoken word in its musical and metrical relations.  The voice was the
medium, and the ear the critic.  I have sometimes thought that the story
of Homer’s blindness might be really an artistic myth, created in
critical days, and serving to remind us, not merely that the great poet
is always a seer, seeing less with the eyes of the body than he does with
the eyes of the soul, but that he is a true singer also, building his
song out of music, repeating each line over and over again to himself
till he has caught the secret of its melody, chaunting in darkness the
words that are winged with light.  Certainly, whether this be so or not,
it was to his blindness, as an occasion, if not as a cause, that
England’s great poet owed much of the majestic movement and sonorous
splendour of his later verse.  When Milton could no longer write he began
to sing.  Who would match the measures of _Comus_ with the measures of
_Samson Agonistes_, or of _Paradise Lost_ or _Regained_?  When Milton
became blind he composed, as every one should compose, with the voice
purely, and so the pipe or reed of earlier days became that mighty
many-stopped organ whose rich reverberant music has all the stateliness
of Homeric verse, if it seeks not to have its swiftness, and is the one
imperishable inheritance of English literature sweeping through all the
ages, because above them, and abiding with us ever, being immortal in its
form.  Yes: writing has done much harm to writers.  We must return to the
voice.  That must be our test, and perhaps then we shall be able to
appreciate some of the subtleties of Greek art-criticism.

As it now is, we cannot do so.  Sometimes, when I have written a piece of
prose that I have been modest enough to consider absolutely free from
fault, a dreadful thought comes over me that I may have been guilty of
the immoral effeminacy of using trochaic and tribrachic movements, a
crime for which a learned critic of the Augustan age censures with most
just severity the brilliant if somewhat paradoxical Hegesias.  I grow
cold when I think of it, and wonder to myself if the admirable ethical
effect of the prose of that charming writer, who once in a spirit of
reckless generosity towards the uncultivated portion of our community
proclaimed the monstrous doctrine that conduct is three-fourths of life,
will not some day be entirely annihilated by the discovery that the pæons
have been wrongly placed.

ERNEST.  Ah! now you are flippant.

GILBERT.  Who would not be flippant when he is gravely told that the
Greeks had no art-critics?  I can understand it being said that the
constructive genius of the Greeks lost itself in criticism, but not that
the race to whom we owe the critical spirit did not criticise.  You will
not ask me to give you a survey of Greek art criticism from Plato to
Plotinus.  The night is too lovely for that, and the moon, if she heard
us, would put more ashes on her face than are there already.  But think
merely of one perfect little work of æsthetic criticism, Aristotle’s
_Treatise on Poetry_.  It is not perfect in form, for it is badly
written, consisting perhaps of notes dotted down for an art lecture, or
of isolated fragments destined for some larger book, but in temper and
treatment it is perfect, absolutely.  The ethical effect of art, its
importance to culture, and its place in the formation of character, had
been done once for all by Plato; but here we have art treated, not from
the moral, but from the purely æsthetic point of view.  Plato had, of
course, dealt with many definitely artistic subjects, such as the
importance of unity in a work of art, the necessity for tone and harmony,
the æsthetic value of appearances, the relation of the visible arts to
the external world, and the relation of fiction to fact.  He first
perhaps stirred in the soul of man that desire that we have not yet
satisfied, the desire to know the connection between Beauty and Truth,
and the place of Beauty in the moral and intellectual order of the
Kosmos.  The problems of idealism and realism, as he sets them forth, may
seem to many to be somewhat barren of result in the metaphysical sphere
of abstract being in which he places them, but transfer them to the
sphere of art, and you will find that they are still vital and full of
meaning.  It may be that it is as a critic of Beauty that Plato is
destined to live, and that by altering the name of the sphere of his
speculation we shall find a new philosophy.  But Aristotle, like Goethe,
deals with art primarily in its concrete manifestations, taking Tragedy,
for instance, and investigating the material it uses, which is language,
its subject-matter, which is life, the method by which it works, which is
action, the conditions under which it reveals itself, which are those of
theatric presentation, its logical structure, which is plot, and its
final æsthetic appeal, which is to the sense of beauty realised through
the passions of pity and awe.  That purification and spiritualising of
the nature which he calls κάθαρσις is, as Goethe saw, essentially
æsthetic, and is not moral, as Lessing fancied.  Concerning himself
primarily with the impression that the work of art produces, Aristotle
sets himself to analyse that impression, to investigate its source, to
see how it is engendered.  As a physiologist and psychologist, he knows
that the health of a function resides in energy.  To have a capacity for
a passion and not to realise it, is to make oneself incomplete and
limited.  The mimic spectacle of life that Tragedy affords cleanses the
bosom of much ‘perilous stuff,’ and by presenting high and worthy objects
for the exercise of the emotions purifies and spiritualises the man; nay,
not merely does it spiritualise him, but it initiates him also into noble
feelings of which he might else have known nothing, the word κάθαρσις
having, it has sometimes seemed to me, a definite allusion to the rite of
initiation, if indeed that be not, as I am occasionally tempted to fancy,
its true and only meaning here.  This is of course a mere outline of the
book.  But you see what a perfect piece of æsthetic criticism it is.  Who
indeed but a Greek could have analysed art so well?  After reading it,
one does not wonder any longer that Alexandria devoted itself so largely
to art-criticism, and that we find the artistic temperaments of the day
investigating every question of style and manner, discussing the great
Academic schools of painting, for instance, such as the school of Sicyon,
that sought to preserve the dignified traditions of the antique mode, or
the realistic and impressionist schools, that aimed at reproducing actual
life, or the elements of ideality in portraiture, or the artistic value
of the epic form in an age so modern as theirs, or the proper
subject-matter for the artist.  Indeed, I fear that the inartistic
temperaments of the day busied themselves also in matters of literature
and art, for the accusations of plagiarism were endless, and such
accusations proceed either from the thin colourless lips of impotence, or
from the grotesque mouths of those who, possessing nothing of their own,
fancy that they can gain a reputation for wealth by crying out that they
have been robbed.  And I assure you, my dear Ernest, that the Greeks
chattered about painters quite as much as people do nowadays, and had
their private views, and shilling exhibitions, and Arts and Crafts
guilds, and Pre-Raphaelite movements, and movements towards realism, and
lectured about art, and wrote essays on art, and produced their
art-historians, and their archæologists, and all the rest of it.  Why,
even the theatrical managers of travelling companies brought their
dramatic critics with them when they went on tour, and paid them very
handsome salaries for writing laudatory notices.  Whatever, in fact, is
modern in our life we owe to the Greeks.  Whatever is an anachronism is
due to mediævalism.  It is the Greeks who have given us the whole system
of art-criticism, and how fine their critical instinct was, may be seen
from the fact that the material they criticised with most care was, as I
have already said, language.  For the material that painter or sculptor
uses is meagre in comparison with that of words.  Words have not merely
music as sweet as that of viol and lute, colour as rich and vivid as any
that makes lovely for us the canvas of the Venetian or the Spaniard, and
plastic form no less sure and certain than that which reveals itself in
marble or in bronze, but thought and passion and spirituality are theirs
also, are theirs indeed alone.  If the Greeks had criticised nothing but
language, they would still have been the great art-critics of the world.
To know the principles of the highest art is to know the principles of
all the arts.

But I see that the moon is hiding behind a sulphur-coloured cloud.  Out
of a tawny mane of drift she gleams like a lion’s eye.  She is afraid
that I will talk to you of Lucian and Longinus, of Quinctilian and
Dionysius, of Pliny and Fronto and Pausanias, of all those who in the
antique world wrote or lectured upon art matters.  She need not be
afraid.  I am tired of my expedition into the dim, dull abyss of facts.
There is nothing left for me now but the divine μονόχρονος ηδονή of
another cigarette.  Cigarettes have at least the charm of leaving one
unsatisfied.

ERNEST.  Try one of mine.  They are rather good.  I get them direct from
Cairo.  The only use of our _attachés_ is that they supply their friends
with excellent tobacco.  And as the moon has hidden herself, let us talk
a little longer.  I am quite ready to admit that I was wrong in what I
said about the Greeks.  They were, as you have pointed out, a nation of
art-critics.  I acknowledge it, and I feel a little sorry for them.  For
the creative faculty is higher than the critical.  There is really no
comparison between them.

GILBERT.  The antithesis between them is entirely arbitrary.  Without the
critical faculty, there is no artistic creation at all, worthy of the
name.  You spoke a little while ago of that fine spirit of choice and
delicate instinct of selection by which the artist realises life for us,
and gives to it a momentary perfection.  Well, that spirit of choice,
that subtle tact of omission, is really the critical faculty in one of
its most characteristic moods, and no one who does not possess this
critical faculty can create anything at all in art.  Arnold’s definition
of literature as a criticism of life was not very felicitous in form, but
it showed how keenly he recognised the importance of the critical element
in all creative work.

ERNEST.  I should have said that great artists work unconsciously, that
they were ‘wiser than they knew,’ as, I think, Emerson remarks somewhere.

GILBERT.  It is really not so, Ernest.  All fine imaginative work is
self-conscious and deliberate.  No poet sings because he must sing.  At
least, no great poet does.  A great poet sings because he chooses to
sing.  It is so now, and it has always been so.  We are sometimes apt to
think that the voices that sounded at the dawn of poetry were simpler,
fresher, and more natural than ours, and that the world which the early
poets looked at, and through which they walked, had a kind of poetical
quality of its own, and almost without changing could pass into song.
The snow lies thick now upon Olympus, and its steep scarped sides are
bleak and barren, but once, we fancy, the white feet of the Muses brushed
the dew from the anemones in the morning, and at evening came Apollo to
sing to the shepherds in the vale.  But in this we are merely lending to
other ages what we desire, or think we desire, for our own.  Our
historical sense is at fault.  Every century that produces poetry is, so
far, an artificial century, and the work that seems to us to be the most
natural and simple product of its time is always the result of the most
self-conscious effort.  Believe me, Ernest, there is no fine art without
self-consciousness, and self-consciousness and the critical spirit are
one.

ERNEST.  I see what you mean, and there is much in it.  But surely you
would admit that the great poems of the early world, the primitive,
anonymous collective poems, were the result of the imagination of races,
rather than of the imagination of individuals?

GILBERT.  Not when they became poetry.  Not when they received a
beautiful form.  For there is no art where there is no style, and no
style where there is no unity, and unity is of the individual.  No doubt
Homer had old ballads and stories to deal with, as Shakespeare had
chronicles and plays and novels from which to work, but they were merely
his rough material.  He took them, and shaped them into song.  They
become his, because he made them lovely.  They were built out of music,

       And so not built at all,
    And therefore built for ever.

The longer one studies life and literature, the more strongly one feels
that behind everything that is wonderful stands the individual, and that
it is not the moment that makes the man, but the man who creates the age.
Indeed, I am inclined to think that each myth and legend that seems to us
to spring out of the wonder, or terror, or fancy of tribe and nation, was
in its origin the invention of one single mind.  The curiously limited
number of the myths seems to me to point to this conclusion.  But we must
not go off into questions of comparative mythology.  We must keep to
criticism.  And what I want to point out is this.  An age that has no
criticism is either an age in which art is immobile, hieratic, and
confined to the reproduction of formal types, or an age that possesses no
art at all.  There have been critical ages that have not been creative,
in the ordinary sense of the word, ages in which the spirit of man has
sought to set in order the treasures of his treasure-house, to separate
the gold from the silver, and the silver from the lead, to count over the
jewels, and to give names to the pearls.  But there has never been a
creative age that has not been critical also.  For it is the critical
faculty that invents fresh forms.  The tendency of creation is to repeat
itself.  It is to the critical instinct that we owe each new school that
springs up, each new mould that art finds ready to its hand.  There is
really not a single form that art now uses that does not come to us from
the critical spirit of Alexandria, where these forms were either
stereotyped or invented or made perfect.  I say Alexandria, not merely
because it was there that the Greek spirit became most self-conscious,
and indeed ultimately expired in scepticism and theology, but because it
was to that city, and not to Athens, that Rome turned for her models, and
it was through the survival, such as it was, of the Latin language that
culture lived at all.  When, at the Renaissance, Greek literature dawned
upon Europe, the soil had been in some measure prepared for it.  But, to
get rid of the details of history, which are always wearisome and usually
inaccurate, let us say generally, that the forms of art have been due to
the Greek critical spirit.  To it we owe the epic, the lyric, the entire
drama in every one of its developments, including burlesque, the idyll,
the romantic novel, the novel of adventure, the essay, the dialogue, the
oration, the lecture, for which perhaps we should not forgive them, and
the epigram, in all the wide meaning of that word.  In fact, we owe it
everything, except the sonnet, to which, however, some curious parallels
of thought-movement may be traced in the Anthology, American journalism,
to which no parallel can be found anywhere, and the ballad in sham Scotch
dialect, which one of our most industrious writers has recently proposed
should be made the basis for a final and unanimous effort on the part of
our second-rate poets to make themselves really romantic.  Each new
school, as it appears, cries out against criticism, but it is to the
critical faculty in man that it owes its origin.  The mere creative
instinct does not innovate, but reproduces.

ERNEST.  You have been talking of criticism as an essential part of the
creative spirit, and I now fully accept your theory.  But what of
criticism outside creation?  I have a foolish habit of reading
periodicals, and it seems to me that most modern criticism is perfectly
valueless.

GILBERT.  So is most modern creative work also.  Mediocrity weighing
mediocrity in the balance, and incompetence applauding its brother—that
is the spectacle which the artistic activity of England affords us from
time to time.  And yet, I feel I am a little unfair in this matter.  As a
rule, the critics—I speak, of course, of the higher class, of those in
fact who write for the sixpenny papers—are far more cultured than the
people whose work they are called upon to review.  This is, indeed, only
what one would expect, for criticism demands infinitely more cultivation
than creation does.

ERNEST.  Really?

GILBERT.  Certainly.  Anybody can write a three-volumed novel.  It merely
requires a complete ignorance of both life and literature.  The
difficulty that I should fancy the reviewer feels is the difficulty of
sustaining any standard.  Where there is no style a standard must be
impossible.  The poor reviewers are apparently reduced to be the
reporters of the police-court of literature, the chroniclers of the
doings of the habitual criminals of art.  It is sometimes said of them
that they do not read all through the works they are called upon to
criticise.  They do not.  Or at least they should not.  If they did so,
they would become confirmed misanthropes, or if I may borrow a phrase
from one of the pretty Newnham graduates, confirmed womanthropes for the
rest of their lives.  Nor is it necessary.  To know the vintage and
quality of a wine one need not drink the whole cask.  It must be
perfectly easy in half an hour to say whether a book is worth anything or
worth nothing.  Ten minutes are really sufficient, if one has the
instinct for form.  Who wants to wade through a dull volume?  One tastes
it, and that is quite enough—more than enough, I should imagine.  I am
aware that there are many honest workers in painting as well as in
literature who object to criticism entirely.  They are quite right.
Their work stands in no intellectual relation to their age.  It brings us
no new element of pleasure.  It suggests no fresh departure of thought,
or passion, or beauty.  It should not be spoken of.  It should be left to
the oblivion that it deserves.

ERNEST.  But, my dear fellow—excuse me for interrupting you—you seem to
me to be allowing your passion for criticism to lead you a great deal too
far.  For, after all, even you must admit that it is much more difficult
to do a thing than to talk about it.

GILBERT.  More difficult to do a thing than to talk about it?  Not at
all.  That is a gross popular error.  It is very much more difficult to
talk about a thing than to do it.  In the sphere of actual life that is
of course obvious.  Anybody can make history.  Only a great man can write
it.  There is no mode of action, no form of emotion, that we do not share
with the lower animals.  It is only by language that we rise above them,
or above each other—by language, which is the parent, and not the child,
of thought.  Action, indeed, is always easy, and when presented to us in
its most aggravated, because most continuous form, which I take to be
that of real industry, becomes simply the refuge of people who have
nothing whatsoever to do.  No, Ernest, don’t talk about action.  It is a
blind thing dependent on external influences, and moved by an impulse of
whose nature it is unconscious.  It is a thing incomplete in its essence,
because limited by accident, and ignorant of its direction, being always
at variance with its aim.  Its basis is the lack of imagination.  It is
the last resource of those who know not how to dream.

ERNEST.  Gilbert, you treat the world as if it were a crystal ball.  You
hold it in your hand, and reverse it to please a wilful fancy.  You do
nothing but re-write history.

GILBERT.  The one duty we owe to history is to re-write it.  That is not
the least of the tasks in store for the critical spirit.  When we have
fully discovered the scientific laws that govern life, we shall realise
that the one person who has more illusions than the dreamer is the man of
action.  He, indeed, knows neither the origin of his deeds nor their
results.  From the field in which he thought that he had sown thorns, we
have gathered our vintage, and the fig-tree that he planted for our
pleasure is as barren as the thistle, and more bitter.  It is because
Humanity has never known where it was going that it has been able to find
its way.

ERNEST.  You think, then, that in the sphere of action a conscious aim is
a delusion?

GILBERT.  It is worse than a delusion.  If we lived long enough to see
the results of our actions it may be that those who call themselves good
would be sickened with a dull remorse, and those whom the world calls
evil stirred by a noble joy.  Each little thing that we do passes into
the great machine of life which may grind our virtues to powder and make
them worthless, or transform our sins into elements of a new
civilisation, more marvellous and more splendid than any that has gone
before.  But men are the slaves of words.  They rage against Materialism,
as they call it, forgetting that there has been no material improvement
that has not spiritualised the world, and that there have been few, if
any, spiritual awakenings that have not wasted the world’s faculties in
barren hopes, and fruitless aspirations, and empty or trammelling creeds.
What is termed Sin is an essential element of progress.  Without it the
world would stagnate, or grow old, or become colourless.  By its
curiosity Sin increases the experience of the race.  Through its
intensified assertion of individualism, it saves us from monotony of
type.  In its rejection of the current notions about morality, it is one
with the higher ethics.  And as for the virtues!  What are the virtues?
Nature, M. Renan tells us, cares little about chastity, and it may be
that it is to the shame of the Magdalen, and not to their own purity,
that the Lucretias of modern life owe their freedom from stain.  Charity,
as even those of whose religion it makes a formal part have been
compelled to acknowledge, creates a multitude of evils.  The mere
existence of conscience, that faculty of which people prate so much
nowadays, and are so ignorantly proud, is a sign of our imperfect
development.  It must be merged in instinct before we become fine.
Self-denial is simply a method by which man arrests his progress, and
self-sacrifice a survival of the mutilation of the savage, part of that
old worship of pain which is so terrible a factor in the history of the
world, and which even now makes its victims day by day, and has its
altars in the land.  Virtues!  Who knows what the virtues are?  Not you.
Not I.  Not any one.  It is well for our vanity that we slay the
criminal, for if we suffered him to live he might show us what we had
gained by his crime.  It is well for his peace that the saint goes to his
martyrdom.  He is spared the sight of the horror of his harvest.

ERNEST.  Gilbert, you sound too harsh a note.  Let us go back to the more
gracious fields of literature.  What was it you said?  That it was more
difficult to talk about a thing than to do it?

GILBERT (_after a pause_).  Yes: I believe I ventured upon that simple
truth.  Surely you see now that I am right?  When man acts he is a
puppet.  When he describes he is a poet.  The whole secret lies in that.
It was easy enough on the sandy plains by windy Ilion to send the notched
arrow from the painted bow, or to hurl against the shield of hide and
flamelike brass the long ash-handled spear.  It was easy for the
adulterous queen to spread the Tyrian carpets for her lord, and then, as
he lay couched in the marble bath, to throw over his head the purple net,
and call to her smooth-faced lover to stab through the meshes at the
heart that should have broken at Aulis.  For Antigone even, with Death
waiting for her as her bridegroom, it was easy to pass through the
tainted air at noon, and climb the hill, and strew with kindly earth the
wretched naked corse that had no tomb.  But what of those who wrote about
these things?  What of those who gave them reality, and made them live
for ever?  Are they not greater than the men and women they sing of?
‘Hector that sweet knight is dead,’ and Lucian tells us how in the dim
under-world Menippus saw the bleaching skull of Helen, and marvelled that
it was for so grim a favour that all those horned ships were launched,
those beautiful mailed men laid low, those towered cities brought to
dust.  Yet, every day the swanlike daughter of Leda comes out on the
battlements, and looks down at the tide of war.  The greybeards wonder at
her loveliness, and she stands by the side of the king.  In his chamber
of stained ivory lies her leman.  He is polishing his dainty armour, and
combing the scarlet plume.  With squire and page, her husband passes from
tent to tent.  She can see his bright hair, and hears, or fancies that
she hears, that clear cold voice.  In the courtyard below, the son of
Priam is buckling on his brazen cuirass.  The white arms of Andromache
are around his neck.  He sets his helmet on the ground, lest their babe
should be frightened.  Behind the embroidered curtains of his pavilion
sits Achilles, in perfumed raiment, while in harness of gilt and silver
the friend of his soul arrays himself to go forth to the fight.  From a
curiously carven chest that his mother Thetis had brought to his
ship-side, the Lord of the Myrmidons takes out that mystic chalice that
the lip of man had never touched, and cleanses it with brimstone, and
with fresh water cools it, and, having washed his hands, fills with black
wine its burnished hollow, and spills the thick grape-blood upon the
ground in honour of Him whom at Dodona barefooted prophets worshipped,
and prays to Him, and knows not that he prays in vain, and that by the
hands of two knights from Troy, Panthous’ son, Euphorbus, whose
love-locks were looped with gold, and the Priamid, the lion-hearted,
Patroklus, the comrade of comrades, must meet his doom.  Phantoms, are
they?  Heroes of mist and mountain?  Shadows in a song?  No: they are
real.  Action!  What is action?  It dies at the moment of its energy.  It
is a base concession to fact.  The world is made by the singer for the
dreamer.

ERNEST.  While you talk it seems to me to be so.

GILBERT.  It is so in truth.  On the mouldering citadel of Troy lies the
lizard like a thing of green bronze.  The owl has built her nest in the
palace of Priam.  Over the empty plain wander shepherd and goatherd with
their flocks, and where, on the wine-surfaced, oily sea, οινοψ πόντος, as
Homer calls it, copper-prowed and streaked with vermilion, the great
galleys of the Danaoi came in their gleaming crescent, the lonely
tunny-fisher sits in his little boat and watches the bobbing corks of his
net.  Yet, every morning the doors of the city are thrown open, and on
foot, or in horse-drawn chariot, the warriors go forth to battle, and
mock their enemies from behind their iron masks.  All day long the fight
rages, and when night comes the torches gleam by the tents, and the
cresset burns in the hall.  Those who live in marble or on painted panel,
know of life but a single exquisite instant, eternal indeed in its
beauty, but limited to one note of passion or one mood of calm.  Those
whom the poet makes live have their myriad emotions of joy and terror, of
courage and despair, of pleasure and of suffering.  The seasons come and
go in glad or saddening pageant, and with winged or leaden feet the years
pass by before them.  They have their youth and their manhood, they are
children, and they grow old.  It is always dawn for St. Helena, as
Veronese saw her at the window.  Through the still morning air the angels
bring her the symbol of God’s pain.  The cool breezes of the morning lift
the gilt threads from her brow.  On that little hill by the city of
Florence, where the lovers of Giorgione are lying, it is always the
solstice of noon, of noon made so languorous by summer suns that hardly
can the slim naked girl dip into the marble tank the round bubble of
clear glass, and the long fingers of the lute-player rest idly upon the
chords.  It is twilight always for the dancing nymphs whom Corot set free
among the silver poplars of France.  In eternal twilight they move, those
frail diaphanous figures, whose tremulous white feet seem not to touch
the dew-drenched grass they tread on.  But those who walk in epos, drama,
or romance, see through the labouring months the young moons wax and
wane, and watch the night from evening unto morning star, and from
sunrise unto sunsetting can note the shifting day with all its gold and
shadow.  For them, as for us, the flowers bloom and wither, and the
Earth, that Green-tressed Goddess as Coleridge calls her, alters her
raiment for their pleasure.  The statue is concentrated to one moment of
perfection.  The image stained upon the canvas possesses no spiritual
element of growth or change.  If they know nothing of death, it is
because they know little of life, for the secrets of life and death
belong to those, and those only, whom the sequence of time affects, and
who possess not merely the present but the future, and can rise or fall
from a past of glory or of shame.  Movement, that problem of the visible
arts, can be truly realised by Literature alone.  It is Literature that
shows us the body in its swiftness and the soul in its unrest.

ERNEST.  Yes; I see now what you mean.  But, surely, the higher you place
the creative artist, the lower must the critic rank.

GILBERT.  Why so?

ERNEST.  Because the best that he can give us will be but an echo of rich
music, a dim shadow of clear-outlined form.  It may, indeed, be that life
is chaos, as you tell me that it is; that its martyrdoms are mean and its
heroisms ignoble; and that it is the function of Literature to create,
from the rough material of actual existence, a new world that will be
more marvellous, more enduring, and more true than the world that common
eyes look upon, and through which common natures seek to realise their
perfection.  But surely, if this new world has been made by the spirit
and touch of a great artist, it will be a thing so complete and perfect
that there will be nothing left for the critic to do.  I quite understand
now, and indeed admit most readily, that it is far more difficult to talk
about a thing than to do it.  But it seems to me that this sound and
sensible maxim, which is really extremely soothing to one’s feelings, and
should be adopted as its motto by every Academy of Literature all over
the world, applies only to the relations that exist between Art and Life,
and not to any relations that there may be between Art and Criticism.

GILBERT.  But, surely, Criticism is itself an art.  And just as artistic
creation implies the working of the critical faculty, and, indeed,
without it cannot be said to exist at all, so Criticism is really
creative in the highest sense of the word.  Criticism is, in fact, both
creative and independent.

ERNEST.  Independent?

GILBERT.  Yes; independent.  Criticism is no more to be judged by any low
standard of imitation or resemblance than is the work of poet or
sculptor.  The critic occupies the same relation to the work of art that
he criticises as the artist does to the visible world of form and colour,
or the unseen world of passion and of thought.  He does not even require
for the perfection of his art the finest materials.  Anything will serve
his purpose.  And just as out of the sordid and sentimental amours of the
silly wife of a small country doctor in the squalid village of
Yonville-l’Abbaye, near Rouen, Gustave Flaubert was able to create a
classic, and make a masterpiece of style, so, from subjects of little or
of no importance, such as the pictures in this year’s Royal Academy, or
in any year’s Royal Academy for that matter, Mr. Lewis Morris’s poems, M.
Ohnet’s novels, or the plays of Mr. Henry Arthur Jones, the true critic
can, if it be his pleasure so to direct or waste his faculty of
contemplation, produce work that will be flawless in beauty and instinct
with intellectual subtlety.  Why not?  Dulness is always an irresistible
temptation for brilliancy, and stupidity is the permanent _Bestia
Trionfans_ that calls wisdom from its cave.  To an artist so creative as
the critic, what does subject-matter signify?  No more and no less than
it does to the novelist and the painter.  Like them, he can find his
motives everywhere.  Treatment is the test.  There is nothing that has
not in it suggestion or challenge.

ERNEST.  But is Criticism really a creative art?

GILBERT.  Why should it not be?  It works with materials, and puts them
into a form that is at once new and delightful.  What more can one say of
poetry?  Indeed, I would call criticism a creation within a creation.
For just as the great artists, from Homer and Æschylus, down to
Shakespeare and Keats, did not go directly to life for their
subject-matter, but sought for it in myth, and legend, and ancient tale,
so the critic deals with materials that others have, as it were, purified
for him, and to which imaginative form and colour have been already
added.  Nay, more, I would say that the highest Criticism, being the
purest form of personal impression, is in its way more creative than
creation, as it has least reference to any standard external to itself,
and is, in fact, its own reason for existing, and, as the Greeks would
put it, in itself, and to itself, an end.  Certainly, it is never
trammelled by any shackles of verisimilitude.  No ignoble considerations
of probability, that cowardly concession to the tedious repetitions of
domestic or public life, affect it ever.  One may appeal from fiction
unto fact.  But from the soul there is no appeal.

ERNEST.  From the soul?

GILBERT.  Yes, from the soul.  That is what the highest criticism really
is, the record of one’s own soul.  It is more fascinating than history,
as it is concerned simply with oneself.  It is more delightful than
philosophy, as its subject is concrete and not abstract, real and not
vague.  It is the only civilised form of autobiography, as it deals not
with the events, but with the thoughts of one’s life; not with life’s
physical accidents of deed or circumstance, but with the spiritual moods
and imaginative passions of the mind.  I am always amused by the silly
vanity of those writers and artists of our day who seem to imagine that
the primary function of the critic is to chatter about their second-rate
work.  The best that one can say of most modern creative art is that it
is just a little less vulgar than reality, and so the critic, with his
fine sense of distinction and sure instinct of delicate refinement, will
prefer to look into the silver mirror or through the woven veil, and will
turn his eyes away from the chaos and clamour of actual existence, though
the mirror be tarnished and the veil be torn.  His sole aim is to
chronicle his own impressions.  It is for him that pictures are painted,
books written, and marble hewn into form.

ERNEST.  I seem to have heard another theory of Criticism.

GILBERT.  Yes: it has been said by one whose gracious memory we all
revere, and the music of whose pipe once lured Proserpina from her
Sicilian fields, and made those white feet stir, and not in vain, the
Cumnor cowslips, that the proper aim of Criticism is to see the object as
in itself it really is.  But this is a very serious error, and takes no
cognisance of Criticism’s most perfect form, which is in its essence
purely subjective, and seeks to reveal its own secret and not the secret
of another.  For the highest Criticism deals with art not as expressive
but as impressive purely.

ERNEST.  But is that really so?

GILBERT.  Of course it is.  Who cares whether Mr. Ruskin’s views on
Turner are sound or not?  What does it matter?  That mighty and majestic
prose of his, so fervid and so fiery-coloured in its noble eloquence, so
rich in its elaborate symphonic music, so sure and certain, at its best,
in subtle choice of word and epithet, is at least as great a work of art
as any of those wonderful sunsets that bleach or rot on their corrupted
canvases in England’s Gallery; greater indeed, one is apt to think at
times, not merely because its equal beauty is more enduring, but on
account of the fuller variety of its appeal, soul speaking to soul in
those long-cadenced lines, not through form and colour alone, though
through these, indeed, completely and without loss, but with intellectual
and emotional utterance, with lofty passion and with loftier thought,
with imaginative insight, and with poetic aim; greater, I always think,
even as Literature is the greater art.  Who, again, cares whether Mr.
Pater has put into the portrait of Monna Lisa something that Lionardo
never dreamed of?  The painter may have been merely the slave of an
archaic smile, as some have fancied, but whenever I pass into the cool
galleries of the Palace of the Louvre, and stand before that strange
figure ‘set in its marble chair in that cirque of fantastic rocks, as in
some faint light under sea,’ I murmur to myself, ‘She is older than the
rocks among which she sits; like the vampire, she has been dead many
times, and learned the secrets of the grave; and has been a diver in deep
seas, and keeps their fallen day about her: and trafficked for strange
webs with Eastern merchants; and, as Leda, was the mother of Helen of
Troy, and, as St. Anne, the mother of Mary; and all this has been to her
but as the sound of lyres and flutes, and lives only in the delicacy with
which it has moulded the changing lineaments, and tinged the eyelids and
the hands.’  And I say to my friend, ‘The presence that thus so strangely
rose beside the waters is expressive of what in the ways of a thousand
years man had come to desire’; and he answers me, ‘Hers is the head upon
which all “the ends of the world are come,” and the eyelids are a little
weary.’

And so the picture becomes more wonderful to us than it really is, and
reveals to us a secret of which, in truth, it knows nothing, and the
music of the mystical prose is as sweet in our ears as was that
flute-player’s music that lent to the lips of La Gioconda those subtle
and poisonous curves.  Do you ask me what Lionardo would have said had
any one told him of this picture that ‘all the thoughts and experience of
the world had etched and moulded therein that which they had of power to
refine and make expressive the outward form, the animalism of Greece, the
lust of Rome, the reverie of the Middle Age with its spiritual ambition
and imaginative loves, the return of the Pagan world, the sins of the
Borgias?’  He would probably have answered that he had contemplated none
of these things, but had concerned himself simply with certain
arrangements of lines and masses, and with new and curious
colour-harmonies of blue and green.  And it is for this very reason that
the criticism which I have quoted is criticism of the highest kind.  It
treats the work of art simply as a starting-point for a new creation.  It
does not confine itself—let us at least suppose so for the moment—to
discovering the real intention of the artist and accepting that as final.
And in this it is right, for the meaning of any beautiful created thing
is, at least, as much in the soul of him who looks at it, as it was in
his soul who wrought it.  Nay, it is rather the beholder who lends to the
beautiful thing its myriad meanings, and makes it marvellous for us, and
sets it in some new relation to the age, so that it becomes a vital
portion of our lives, and a symbol of what we pray for, or perhaps of
what, having prayed for, we fear that we may receive.  The longer I
study, Ernest, the more clearly I see that the beauty of the visible arts
is, as the beauty of music, impressive primarily, and that it may be
marred, and indeed often is so, by any excess of intellectual intention
on the part of the artist.  For when the work is finished it has, as it
were, an independent life of its own, and may deliver a message far other
than that which was put into its lips to say.  Sometimes, when I listen
to the overture to _Tannhäuser_, I seem indeed to see that comely knight
treading delicately on the flower-strewn grass, and to hear the voice of
Venus calling to him from the caverned hill.  But at other times it
speaks to me of a thousand different things, of myself, it may be, and my
own life, or of the lives of others whom one has loved and grown weary of
loving, or of the passions that man has known, or of the passions that
man has not known, and so has sought for.  To-night it may fill one with
that ΕΡΩΣ ΤΩΝ ΑΔΥΝΑΤΩΝ, that _Amour de l’Impossible_, which falls like a
madness on many who think they live securely and out of reach of harm, so
that they sicken suddenly with the poison of unlimited desire, and, in
the infinite pursuit of what they may not obtain, grow faint and swoon or
stumble.  To-morrow, like the music of which Aristotle and Plato tell us,
the noble Dorian music of the Greek, it may perform the office of a
physician, and give us an anodyne against pain, and heal the spirit that
is wounded, and ‘bring the soul into harmony with all right things.’  And
what is true about music is true about all the arts.  Beauty has as many
meanings as man has moods.  Beauty is the symbol of symbols.  Beauty
reveals everything, because it expresses nothing.  When it shows us
itself, it shows us the whole fiery-coloured world.

ERNEST.  But is such work as you have talked about really criticism?

GILBERT.  It is the highest Criticism, for it criticises not merely the
individual work of art, but Beauty itself, and fills with wonder a form
which the artist may have left void, or not understood, or understood
incompletely.

ERNEST.  The highest Criticism, then, is more creative than creation, and
the primary aim of the critic is to see the object as in itself it really
is not; that is your theory, I believe?

GILBERT.  Yes, that is my theory.  To the critic the work of art is
simply a suggestion for a new work of his own, that need not necessarily
bear any obvious resemblance to the thing it criticises.  The one
characteristic of a beautiful form is that one can put into it whatever
one wishes, and see in it whatever one chooses to see; and the Beauty,
that gives to creation its universal and æsthetic element, makes the
critic a creator in his turn, and whispers of a thousand different things
which were not present in the mind of him who carved the statue or
painted the panel or graved the gem.

It is sometimes said by those who understand neither the nature of the
highest Criticism nor the charm of the highest Art, that the pictures
that the critic loves most to write about are those that belong to the
anecdotage of painting, and that deal with scenes taken out of literature
or history.  But this is not so.  Indeed, pictures of this kind are far
too intelligible.  As a class, they rank with illustrations, and, even
considered from this point of view are failures, as they do not stir the
imagination, but set definite bounds to it.  For the domain of the
painter is, as I suggested before, widely different from that of the
poet.  To the latter belongs life in its full and absolute entirety; not
merely the beauty that men look at, but the beauty that men listen to
also; not merely the momentary grace of form or the transient gladness of
colour, but the whole sphere of feeling, the perfect cycle of thought.
The painter is so far limited that it is only through the mask of the
body that he can show us the mystery of the soul; only through
conventional images that he can handle ideas; only through its physical
equivalents that he can deal with psychology.  And how inadequately does
he do it then, asking us to accept the torn turban of the Moor for the
noble rage of Othello, or a dotard in a storm for the wild madness of
Lear!  Yet it seems as if nothing could stop him.  Most of our elderly
English painters spend their wicked and wasted lives in poaching upon the
domain of the poets, marring their motives by clumsy treatment, and
striving to render, by visible form or colour, the marvel of what is
invisible, the splendour of what is not seen.  Their pictures are, as a
natural consequence, insufferably tedious.  They have degraded the
invisible arts into the obvious arts, and the one thing not worth looking
at is the obvious.  I do not say that poet and painter may not treat of
the same subject.  They have always done so and will always do so.  But
while the poet can be pictorial or not, as he chooses, the painter must
be pictorial always.  For a painter is limited, not to what he sees in
nature, but to what upon canvas may be seen.

And so, my dear Ernest, pictures of this kind will not really fascinate
the critic.  He will turn from them to such works as make him brood and
dream and fancy, to works that possess the subtle quality of suggestion,
and seem to tell one that even from them there is an escape into a wider
world.  It is sometimes said that the tragedy of an artist’s life is that
he cannot realise his ideal.  But the true tragedy that dogs the steps of
most artists is that they realise their ideal too absolutely.  For, when
the ideal is realised, it is robbed of its wonder and its mystery, and
becomes simply a new starting-point for an ideal that is other than
itself.  This is the reason why music is the perfect type of art.  Music
can never reveal its ultimate secret.  This, also, is the explanation of
the value of limitations in art.  The sculptor gladly surrenders
imitative colour, and the painter the actual dimensions of form, because
by such renunciations they are able to avoid too definite a presentation
of the Real, which would be mere imitation, and too definite a
realisation of the Ideal, which would be too purely intellectual.  It is
through its very incompleteness that art becomes complete in beauty, and
so addresses itself, not to the faculty of recognition nor to the faculty
of reason, but to the æsthetic sense alone, which, while accepting both
reason and recognition as stages of apprehension, subordinates them both
to a pure synthetic impression of the work of art as a whole, and, taking
whatever alien emotional elements the work may possess, uses their very
complexity as a means by which a richer unity may be added to the
ultimate impression itself.  You see, then, how it is that the æsthetic
critic rejects these obvious modes of art that have but one message to
deliver, and having delivered it become dumb and sterile, and seeks
rather for such modes as suggest reverie and mood, and by their
imaginative beauty make all interpretations true, and no interpretation
final.  Some resemblance, no doubt, the creative work of the critic will
have to the work that has stirred him to creation, but it will be such
resemblance as exists, not between Nature and the mirror that the painter
of landscape or figure may be supposed to hold up to her, but between
Nature and the work of the decorative artist.  Just as on the flowerless
carpets of Persia, tulip and rose blossom indeed and are lovely to look
on, though they are not reproduced in visible shape or line; just as the
pearl and purple of the sea-shell is echoed in the church of St. Mark at
Venice; just as the vaulted ceiling of the wondrous chapel at Ravenna is
made gorgeous by the gold and green and sapphire of the peacock’s tail,
though the birds of Juno fly not across it; so the critic reproduces the
work that he criticises in a mode that is never imitative, and part of
whose charm may really consist in the rejection of resemblance, and shows
us in this way not merely the meaning but also the mystery of Beauty,
and, by transforming each art into literature, solves once for all the
problem of Art’s unity.

But I see it is time for supper.  After we have discussed some Chambertin
and a few ortolans, we will pass on to the question of the critic
considered in the light of the interpreter.

ERNEST.  Ah! you admit, then, that the critic may occasionally be allowed
to see the object as in itself it really is.

GILBERT.  I am not quite sure.  Perhaps I may admit it after supper.
There is a subtle influence in supper.




THE CRITIC AS ARTIST
WITH SOME REMARKS UPON THE IMPORTANCE
OF DISCUSSING EVERYTHING

ERNEST.  The ortolans were delightful, and the Chambertin perfect, and
now let us return to the point at issue.

GILBERT.  Ah! don’t let us do that.  Conversation should touch
everything, but should concentrate itself on nothing.  Let us talk about
_Moral Indignation_, _its Cause and Cure_, a subject on which I think of
writing: or about _The Survival of Thersites_, as shown by the English
comic papers; or about any topic that may turn up.

ERNEST.  No; I want to discuss the critic and criticism.  You have told
me that the highest criticism deals with art, not as expressive, but as
impressive purely, and is consequently both creative and independent, is
in fact an art by itself, occupying the same relation to creative work
that creative work does to the visible world of form and colour, or the
unseen world of passion and of thought.  Well, now, tell me, will not the
critic be sometimes a real interpreter?

GILBERT.  Yes; the critic will be an interpreter, if he chooses.  He can
pass from his synthetic impression of the work of art as a whole, to an
analysis or exposition of the work itself, and in this lower sphere, as I
hold it to be, there are many delightful things to be said and done.  Yet
his object will not always be to explain the work of art.  He may seek
rather to deepen its mystery, to raise round it, and round its maker,
that mist of wonder which is dear to both gods and worshippers alike.
Ordinary people are ‘terribly at ease in Zion.’  They propose to walk arm
in arm with the poets, and have a glib ignorant way of saying, ‘Why
should we read what is written about Shakespeare and Milton?  We can read
the plays and the poems.  That is enough.’  But an appreciation of Milton
is, as the late Rector of Lincoln remarked once, the reward of consummate
scholarship.  And he who desires to understand Shakespeare truly must
understand the relations in which Shakespeare stood to the Renaissance
and the Reformation, to the age of Elizabeth and the age of James; he
must be familiar with the history of the struggle for supremacy between
the old classical forms and the new spirit of romance, between the school
of Sidney, and Daniel, and Johnson, and the school of Marlowe and
Marlowe’s greater son; he must know the materials that were at
Shakespeare’s disposal, and the method in which he used them, and the
conditions of theatric presentation in the sixteenth and seventeenth
century, their limitations and their opportunities for freedom, and the
literary criticism of Shakespeare’s day, its aims and modes and canons;
he must study the English language in its progress, and blank or rhymed
verse in its various developments; he must study the Greek drama, and the
connection between the art of the creator of the Agamemnon and the art of
the creator of Macbeth; in a word, he must be able to bind Elizabethan
London to the Athens of Pericles, and to learn Shakespeare’s true
position in the history of European drama and the drama of the world.
The critic will certainly be an interpreter, but he will not treat Art as
a riddling Sphinx, whose shallow secret may be guessed and revealed by
one whose feet are wounded and who knows not his name.  Rather, he will
look upon Art as a goddess whose mystery it is his province to intensify,
and whose majesty his privilege to make more marvellous in the eyes of
men.

And here, Ernest, this strange thing happens.  The critic will indeed be
an interpreter, but he will not be an interpreter in the sense of one who
simply repeats in another form a message that has been put into his lips
to say.  For, just as it is only by contact with the art of foreign
nations that the art of a country gains that individual and separate life
that we call nationality, so, by curious inversion, it is only by
intensifying his own personality that the critic can interpret the
personality and work of others, and the more strongly this personality
enters into the interpretation the more real the interpretation becomes,
the more satisfying, the more convincing, and the more true.

ERNEST.  I would have said that personality would have been a disturbing
element.

GILBERT.  No; it is an element of revelation.  If you wish to understand
others you must intensify your own individualism.

ERNEST.  What, then, is the result?

GILBERT.  I will tell you, and perhaps I can tell you best by definite
example.  It seems to me that, while the literary critic stands of course
first, as having the wider range, and larger vision, and nobler material,
each of the arts has a critic, as it were, assigned to it.  The actor is
a critic of the drama.  He shows the poet’s work under new conditions,
and by a method special to himself.  He takes the written word, and
action, gesture and voice become the media of revelation.  The singer or
the player on lute and viol is the critic of music.  The etcher of a
picture robs the painting of its fair colours, but shows us by the use of
a new material its true colour-quality, its tones and values, and the
relations of its masses, and so is, in his way, a critic of it, for the
critic is he who exhibits to us a work of art in a form different from
that of the work itself, and the employment of a new material is a
critical as well as a creative element.  Sculpture, too, has its critic,
who may be either the carver of a gem, as he was in Greek days, or some
painter like Mantegna, who sought to reproduce on canvas the beauty of
plastic line and the symphonic dignity of processional bas-relief.  And
in the case of all these creative critics of art it is evident that
personality is an absolute essential for any real interpretation.  When
Rubinstein plays to us the _Sonata Appassionata_ of Beethoven, he gives
us not merely Beethoven, but also himself, and so gives us Beethoven
absolutely—Beethoven re-interpreted through a rich artistic nature, and
made vivid and wonderful to us by a new and intense personality.  When a
great actor plays Shakespeare we have the same experience.  His own
individuality becomes a vital part of the interpretation.  People
sometimes say that actors give us their own Hamlets, and not
Shakespeare’s; and this fallacy—for it is a fallacy—is, I regret to say,
repeated by that charming and graceful writer who has lately deserted the
turmoil of literature for the peace of the House of Commons, I mean the
author of _Obiter Dicta_.  In point of fact, there is no such thing as
Shakespeare’s Hamlet.  If Hamlet has something of the definiteness of a
work of art, he has also all the obscurity that belongs to life.  There
are as many Hamlets as there are melancholies.

ERNEST.  As many Hamlets as there are melancholies?

GILBERT.  Yes: and as art springs from personality, so it is only to
personality that it can be revealed, and from the meeting of the two
comes right interpretative criticism.

ERNEST.  The critic, then, considered as the interpreter, will give no
less than he receives, and lend as much as he borrows?

GILBERT.  He will be always showing us the work of art in some new
relation to our age.  He will always be reminding us that great works of
art are living things—are, in fact, the only things that live.  So much,
indeed, will he feel this, that I am certain that, as civilisation
progresses and we become more highly organised, the elect spirits of each
age, the critical and cultured spirits, will grow less and less
interested in actual life, and _will seek to gain their impressions
almost entirely from what Art has touched_.  For life is terribly
deficient in form.  Its catastrophes happen in the wrong way and to the
wrong people.  There is a grotesque horror about its comedies, and its
tragedies seem to culminate in farce.  One is always wounded when one
approaches it.  Things last either too long, or not long enough.

ERNEST.  Poor life!  Poor human life!  Are you not even touched by the
tears that the Roman poet tells us are part of its essence.

GILBERT.  Too quickly touched by them, I fear.  For when one looks back
upon the life that was so vivid in its emotional intensity, and filled
with such fervent moments of ecstasy or of joy, it all seems to be a
dream and an illusion.  What are the unreal things, but the passions that
once burned one like fire?  What are the incredible things, but the
things that one has faithfully believed?  What are the improbable things?
The things that one has done oneself.  No, Ernest; life cheats us with
shadows, like a puppet-master.  We ask it for pleasure.  It gives it to
us, with bitterness and disappointment in its train.  We come across some
noble grief that we think will lend the purple dignity of tragedy to our
days, but it passes away from us, and things less noble take its place,
and on some grey windy dawn, or odorous eve of silence and of silver, we
find ourselves looking with callous wonder, or dull heart of stone, at
the tress of gold-flecked hair that we had once so wildly worshipped and
so madly kissed.

ERNEST.  Life then is a failure?

GILBERT.  From the artistic point of view, certainly.  And the chief
thing that makes life a failure from this artistic point of view is the
thing that lends to life its sordid security, the fact that one can never
repeat exactly the same emotion.  How different it is in the world of
Art!  On a shelf of the bookcase behind you stands the _Divine Comedy_,
and I know that, if I open it at a certain place, I shall be filled with
a fierce hatred of some one who has never wronged me, or stirred by a
great love for some one whom I shall never see.  There is no mood or
passion that Art cannot give us, and those of us who have discovered her
secret can settle beforehand what our experiences are going to be.  We
can choose our day and select our hour.  We can say to ourselves,
‘To-morrow, at dawn, we shall walk with grave Virgil through the valley
of the shadow of death,’ and lo! the dawn finds us in the obscure wood,
and the Mantuan stands by our side.  We pass through the gate of the
legend fatal to hope, and with pity or with joy behold the horror of
another world.  The hypocrites go by, with their painted faces and their
cowls of gilded lead.  Out of the ceaseless winds that drive them, the
carnal look at us, and we watch the heretic rending his flesh, and the
glutton lashed by the rain.  We break the withered branches from the tree
in the grove of the Harpies, and each dull-hued poisonous twig bleeds
with red blood before us, and cries aloud with bitter cries.  Out of a
horn of fire Odysseus speaks to us, and when from his sepulchre of flame
the great Ghibelline rises, the pride that triumphs over the torture of
that bed becomes ours for a moment.  Through the dim purple air fly those
who have stained the world with the beauty of their sin, and in the pit
of loathsome disease, dropsy-stricken and swollen of body into the
semblance of a monstrous lute, lies Adamo di Brescia, the coiner of false
coin.  He bids us listen to his misery; we stop, and with dry and gaping
lips he tells us how he dreams day and night of the brooks of clear water
that in cool dewy channels gush down the green Casentine hills.  Sinon,
the false Greek of Troy, mocks at him.  He smites him in the face, and
they wrangle.  We are fascinated by their shame, and loiter, till Virgil
chides us and leads us away to that city turreted by giants where great
Nimrod blows his horn.  Terrible things are in store for us, and we go to
meet them in Dante’s raiment and with Dante’s heart.  We traverse the
marshes of the Styx, and Argenti swims to the boat through the slimy
waves.  He calls to us, and we reject him.  When we hear the voice of his
agony we are glad, and Virgil praises us for the bitterness of our scorn.
We tread upon the cold crystal of Cocytus, in which traitors stick like
straws in glass.  Our foot strikes against the head of Bocca.  He will
not tell us his name, and we tear the hair in handfuls from the screaming
skull.  Alberigo prays us to break the ice upon his face that he may weep
a little.  We pledge our word to him, and when he has uttered his
dolorous tale we deny the word that we have spoken, and pass from him;
such cruelty being courtesy indeed, for who more base than he who has
mercy for the condemned of God?  In the jaws of Lucifer we see the man
who sold Christ, and in the jaws of Lucifer the men who slew Cæsar.  We
tremble, and come forth to re-behold the stars.

In the land of Purgation the air is freer, and the holy mountain rises
into the pure light of day.  There is peace for us, and for those who for
a season abide in it there is some peace also, though, pale from the
poison of the Maremma, Madonna Pia passes before us, and Ismene, with the
sorrow of earth still lingering about her, is there.  Soul after soul
makes us share in some repentance or some joy.  He whom the mourning of
his widow taught to drink the sweet wormwood of pain, tells us of Nella
praying in her lonely bed, and we learn from the mouth of Buonconte how a
single tear may save a dying sinner from the fiend.  Sordello, that noble
and disdainful Lombard, eyes us from afar like a couchant lion.  When he
learns that Virgil is one of Mantua’s citizens, he falls upon his neck,
and when he learns that he is the singer of Rome he falls before his
feet.  In that valley whose grass and flowers are fairer than cleft
emerald and Indian wood, and brighter than scarlet and silver, they are
singing who in the world were kings; but the lips of Rudolph of Hapsburg
do not move to the music of the others, and Philip of France beats his
breast and Henry of England sits alone.  On and on we go, climbing the
marvellous stair, and the stars become larger than their wont, and the
song of the kings grows faint, and at length we reach the seven trees of
gold and the garden of the Earthly Paradise.  In a griffin-drawn chariot
appears one whose brows are bound with olive, who is veiled in white, and
mantled in green, and robed in a vesture that is coloured like live fire.
The ancient flame wakes within us.  Our blood quickens through terrible
pulses.  We recognise her.  It is Beatrice, the woman we have worshipped.
The ice congealed about our heart melts.  Wild tears of anguish break
from us, and we bow our forehead to the ground, for we know that we have
sinned.  When we have done penance, and are purified, and have drunk of
the fountain of Lethe and bathed in the fountain of Eunoe, the mistress
of our soul raises us to the Paradise of Heaven.  Out of that eternal
pearl, the moon, the face of Piccarda Donati leans to us.  Her beauty
troubles us for a moment, and when, like a thing that falls through
water, she passes away, we gaze after her with wistful eyes.  The sweet
planet of Venus is full of lovers.  Cunizza, the sister of Ezzelin, the
lady of Sordello’s heart, is there, and Folco, the passionate singer of
Provence, who in sorrow for Azalais forsook the world, and the
Canaanitish harlot whose soul was the first that Christ redeemed.
Joachim of Flora stands in the sun, and, in the sun, Aquinas recounts the
story of St. Francis and Bonaventure the story of St. Dominic.  Through
the burning rubies of Mars, Cacciaguida approaches.  He tells us of the
arrow that is shot from the bow of exile, and how salt tastes the bread
of another, and how steep are the stairs in the house of a stranger.  In
Saturn the soul sings not, and even she who guides us dare not smile.  On
a ladder of gold the flames rise and fall.  At last, we see the pageant
of the Mystical Rose.  Beatrice fixes her eyes upon the face of God to
turn them not again.  The beatific vision is granted to us; we know the
Love that moves the sun and all the stars.

Yes, we can put the earth back six hundred courses and make ourselves one
with the great Florentine, kneel at the same altar with him, and share
his rapture and his scorn.  And if we grow tired of an antique time, and
desire to realise our own age in all its weariness and sin, are there not
books that can make us live more in one single hour than life can make us
live in a score of shameful years?  Close to your hand lies a little
volume, bound in some Nile-green skin that has been powdered with gilded
nenuphars and smoothed with hard ivory.  It is the book that Gautier
loved, it is Baudelaire’s masterpiece.  Open it at that sad madrigal that
begins

    Que m’importe que tu sois sage?
    Sois belle! et sois triste!

and you will find yourself worshipping sorrow as you have never
worshipped joy.  Pass on to the poem on the man who tortures himself, let
its subtle music steal into your brain and colour your thoughts, and you
will become for a moment what he was who wrote it; nay, not for a moment
only, but for many barren moonlit nights and sunless sterile days will a
despair that is not your own make its dwelling within you, and the misery
of another gnaw your heart away.  Read the whole book, suffer it to tell
even one of its secrets to your soul, and your soul will grow eager to
know more, and will feed upon poisonous honey, and seek to repent of
strange crimes of which it is guiltless, and to make atonement for
terrible pleasures that it has never known.  And then, when you are tired
of these flowers of evil, turn to the flowers that grow in the garden of
Perdita, and in their dew-drenched chalices cool your fevered brow, and
let their loveliness heal and restore your soul; or wake from his
forgotten tomb the sweet Syrian, Meleager, and bid the lover of Heliodore
make you music, for he too has flowers in his song, red pomegranate
blossoms, and irises that smell of myrrh, ringed daffodils and dark blue
hyacinths, and marjoram and crinkled ox-eyes.  Dear to him was the
perfume of the bean-field at evening, and dear to him the odorous
eared-spikenard that grew on the Syrian hills, and the fresh green thyme,
the wine-cup’s charm.  The feet of his love as she walked in the garden
were like lilies set upon lilies.  Softer than sleep-laden poppy petals
were her lips, softer than violets and as scented.  The flame-like crocus
sprang from the grass to look at her.  For her the slim narcissus stored
the cool rain; and for her the anemones forgot the Sicilian winds that
wooed them.  And neither crocus, nor anemone, nor narcissus was as fair
as she was.

It is a strange thing, this transference of emotion.  We sicken with the
same maladies as the poets, and the singer lends us his pain.  Dead lips
have their message for us, and hearts that have fallen to dust can
communicate their joy.  We run to kiss the bleeding mouth of Fantine, and
we follow Manon Lescaut over the whole world.  Ours is the love-madness
of the Tyrian, and the terror of Orestes is ours also.  There is no
passion that we cannot feel, no pleasure that we may not gratify, and we
can choose the time of our initiation and the time of our freedom also.
Life!  Life!  Don’t let us go to life for our fulfilment or our
experience.  It is a thing narrowed by circumstances, incoherent in its
utterance, and without that fine correspondence of form and spirit which
is the only thing that can satisfy the artistic and critical temperament.
It makes us pay too high a price for its wares, and we purchase the
meanest of its secrets at a cost that is monstrous and infinite.

ERNEST.  Must we go, then, to Art for everything?

GILBERT.  For everything.  Because Art does not hurt us.  The tears that
we shed at a play are a type of the exquisite sterile emotions that it is
the function of Art to awaken.  We weep, but we are not wounded.  We
grieve, but our grief is not bitter.  In the actual life of man, sorrow,
as Spinoza says somewhere, is a passage to a lesser perfection.  But the
sorrow with which Art fills us both purifies and initiates, if I may
quote once more from the great art critic of the Greeks.  It is through
Art, and through Art only, that we can realise our perfection; through
Art, and through Art only, that we can shield ourselves from the sordid
perils of actual existence.  This results not merely from the fact that
nothing that one can imagine is worth doing, and that one can imagine
everything, but from the subtle law that emotional forces, like the
forces of the physical sphere, are limited in extent and energy.  One can
feel so much, and no more.  And how can it matter with what pleasure life
tries to tempt one, or with what pain it seeks to maim and mar one’s
soul, if in the spectacle of the lives of those who have never existed
one has found the true secret of joy, and wept away one’s tears over
their deaths who, like Cordelia and the daughter of Brabantio, can never
die?

ERNEST.  Stop a moment.  It seems to me that in everything that you have
said there is something radically immoral.

GILBERT.  All art is immoral.

ERNEST.  All art?

GILBERT.  Yes.  For emotion for the sake of emotion is the aim of art,
and emotion for the sake of action is the aim of life, and of that
practical organisation of life that we call society.  Society, which is
the beginning and basis of morals, exists simply for the concentration of
human energy, and in order to ensure its own continuance and healthy
stability it demands, and no doubt rightly demands, of each of its
citizens that he should contribute some form of productive labour to the
common weal, and toil and travail that the day’s work may be done.
Society often forgives the criminal; it never forgives the dreamer.  The
beautiful sterile emotions that art excites in us are hateful in its
eyes, and so completely are people dominated by the tyranny of this
dreadful social ideal that they are always coming shamelessly up to one
at Private Views and other places that are open to the general public,
and saying in a loud stentorian voice, ‘What are you doing?’ whereas
‘What are you thinking?’ is the only question that any single civilised
being should ever be allowed to whisper to another.  They mean well, no
doubt, these honest beaming folk.  Perhaps that is the reason why they
are so excessively tedious.  But some one should teach them that while,
in the opinion of society, Contemplation is the gravest sin of which any
citizen can be guilty, in the opinion of the highest culture it is the
proper occupation of man.

ERNEST.  Contemplation?

GILBERT.  Contemplation.  I said to you some time ago that it was far
more difficult to talk about a thing than to do it.  Let me say to you
now that to do nothing at all is the most difficult thing in the world,
the most difficult and the most intellectual.  To Plato, with his passion
for wisdom, this was the noblest form of energy.  To Aristotle, with his
passion for knowledge, this was the noblest form of energy also.  It was
to this that the passion for holiness led the saint and the mystic of
mediæval days.

ERNEST.  We exist, then, to do nothing?

GILBERT.  It is to do nothing that the elect exist.  Action is limited
and relative.  Unlimited and absolute is the vision of him who sits at
ease and watches, who walks in loneliness and dreams.  But we who are
born at the close of this wonderful age are at once too cultured and too
critical, too intellectually subtle and too curious of exquisite
pleasures, to accept any speculations about life in exchange for life
itself.  To us the _città divina_ is colourless, and the _fruitio Dei_
without meaning.  Metaphysics do not satisfy our temperaments, and
religious ecstasy is out of date.  The world through which the Academic
philosopher becomes ‘the spectator of all time and of all existence’ is
not really an ideal world, but simply a world of abstract ideas.  When we
enter it, we starve amidst the chill mathematics of thought.  The courts
of the city of God are not open to us now.  Its gates are guarded by
Ignorance, and to pass them we have to surrender all that in our nature
is most divine.  It is enough that our fathers believed.  They have
exhausted the faith-faculty of the species.  Their legacy to us is the
scepticism of which they were afraid.  Had they put it into words, it
might not live within us as thought.  No, Ernest, no.  We cannot go back
to the saint.  There is far more to be learned from the sinner.  We
cannot go back to the philosopher, and the mystic leads us astray.  Who,
as Mr. Pater suggests somewhere, would exchange the curve of a single
rose-leaf for that formless intangible Being which Plato rates so high?
What to us is the Illumination of Philo, the Abyss of Eckhart, the Vision
of Böhme, the monstrous Heaven itself that was revealed to Swedenborg’s
blinded eyes?  Such things are less than the yellow trumpet of one
daffodil of the field, far less than the meanest of the visible arts,
for, just as Nature is matter struggling into mind, so Art is mind
expressing itself under the conditions of matter, and thus, even in the
lowliest of her manifestations, she speaks to both sense and soul alike.
To the æsthetic temperament the vague is always repellent.  The Greeks
were a nation of artists, because they were spared the sense of the
infinite.  Like Aristotle, like Goethe after he had read Kant, we desire
the concrete, and nothing but the concrete can satisfy us.

ERNEST.  What then do you propose?

GILBERT.  It seems to me that with the development of the critical spirit
we shall be able to realise, not merely our own lives, but the collective
life of the race, and so to make ourselves absolutely modern, in the true
meaning of the word modernity.  For he to whom the present is the only
thing that is present, knows nothing of the age in which he lives.  To
realise the nineteenth century, one must realise every century that has
preceded it and that has contributed to its making.  To know anything
about oneself one must know all about others.  There must be no mood with
which one cannot sympathise, no dead mode of life that one cannot make
alive.  Is this impossible?  I think not.  By revealing to us the
absolute mechanism of all action, and so freeing us from the self-imposed
and trammelling burden of moral responsibility, the scientific principle
of Heredity has become, as it were, the warrant for the contemplative
life.  It has shown us that we are never less free than when we try to
act.  It has hemmed us round with the nets of the hunter, and written
upon the wall the prophecy of our doom.  We may not watch it, for it is
within us.  We may not see it, save in a mirror that mirrors the soul.
It is Nemesis without her mask.  It is the last of the Fates, and the
most terrible.  It is the only one of the Gods whose real name we know.

And yet, while in the sphere of practical and external life it has robbed
energy of its freedom and activity of its choice, in the subjective
sphere, where the soul is at work, it comes to us, this terrible shadow,
with many gifts in its hands, gifts of strange temperaments and subtle
susceptibilities, gifts of wild ardours and chill moods of indifference,
complex multiform gifts of thoughts that are at variance with each other,
and passions that war against themselves.  And so, it is not our own life
that we live, but the lives of the dead, and the soul that dwells within
us is no single spiritual entity, making us personal and individual,
created for our service, and entering into us for our joy.  It is
something that has dwelt in fearful places, and in ancient sepulchres has
made its abode.  It is sick with many maladies, and has memories of
curious sins.  It is wiser than we are, and its wisdom is bitter.  It
fills us with impossible desires, and makes us follow what we know we
cannot gain.  One thing, however, Ernest, it can do for us.  It can lead
us away from surroundings whose beauty is dimmed to us by the mist of
familiarity, or whose ignoble ugliness and sordid claims are marring the
perfection of our development.  It can help us to leave the age in which
we were born, and to pass into other ages, and find ourselves not exiled
from their air.  It can teach us how to escape from our experience, and
to realise the experiences of those who are greater than we are.  The
pain of Leopardi crying out against life becomes our pain.  Theocritus
blows on his pipe, and we laugh with the lips of nymph and shepherd.  In
the wolfskin of Pierre Vidal we flee before the hounds, and in the armour
of Lancelot we ride from the bower of the Queen.  We have whispered the
secret of our love beneath the cowl of Abelard, and in the stained
raiment of Villon have put our shame into song.  We can see the dawn
through Shelley’s eyes, and when we wander with Endymion the Moon grows
amorous of our youth.  Ours is the anguish of Atys, and ours the weak
rage and noble sorrows of the Dane.  Do you think that it is the
imagination that enables us to live these countless lives?  Yes: it is
the imagination; and the imagination is the result of heredity.  It is
simply concentrated race-experience.

ERNEST.  But where in this is the function of the critical spirit?

GILBERT.  The culture that this transmission of racial experiences makes
possible can be made perfect by the critical spirit alone, and indeed may
be said to be one with it.  For who is the true critic but he who bears
within himself the dreams, and ideas, and feelings of myriad generations,
and to whom no form of thought is alien, no emotional impulse obscure?
And who the true man of culture, if not he who by fine scholarship and
fastidious rejection has made instinct self-conscious and intelligent,
and can separate the work that has distinction from the work that has it
not, and so by contact and comparison makes himself master of the secrets
of style and school, and understands their meanings, and listens to their
voices, and develops that spirit of disinterested curiosity which is the
real root, as it is the real flower, of the intellectual life, and thus
attains to intellectual clarity, and, having learned ‘the best that is
known and thought in the world,’ lives—it is not fanciful to say so—with
those who are the Immortals.

Yes, Ernest: the contemplative life, the life that has for its aim not
_doing_ but _being_, and not _being_ merely, but _becoming_—that is what
the critical spirit can give us.  The gods live thus: either brooding
over their own perfection, as Aristotle tells us, or, as Epicurus
fancied, watching with the calm eyes of the spectator the tragicomedy of
the world that they have made.  We, too, might live like them, and set
ourselves to witness with appropriate emotions the varied scenes that man
and nature afford.  We might make ourselves spiritual by detaching
ourselves from action, and become perfect by the rejection of energy.  It
has often seemed to me that Browning felt something of this.  Shakespeare
hurls Hamlet into active life, and makes him realise his mission by
effort.  Browning might have given us a Hamlet who would have realised
his mission by thought.  Incident and event were to him unreal or
unmeaning.  He made the soul the protagonist of life’s tragedy, and
looked on action as the one undramatic element of a play.  To us, at any
rate, the ΒΙΟΣ ΘΕΩΡΗΤΙΚΟΣ is the true ideal.  From the high tower of
Thought we can look out at the world.  Calm, and self-centred, and
complete, the æsthetic critic contemplates life, and no arrow drawn at a
venture can pierce between the joints of his harness.  He at least is
safe.  He has discovered how to live.

Is such a mode of life immoral?  Yes: all the arts are immoral, except
those baser forms of sensual or didactic art that seek to excite to
action of evil or of good.  For action of every kind belongs to the
sphere of ethics.  The aim of art is simply to create a mood.  Is such a
mode of life unpractical?  Ah! it is not so easy to be unpractical as the
ignorant Philistine imagines.  It were well for England if it were so.
There is no country in the world so much in need of unpractical people as
this country of ours.  With us, Thought is degraded by its constant
association with practice.  Who that moves in the stress and turmoil of
actual existence, noisy politician, or brawling social reformer, or poor
narrow-minded priest blinded by the sufferings of that unimportant
section of the community among whom he has cast his lot, can seriously
claim to be able to form a disinterested intellectual judgment about any
one thing?  Each of the professions means a prejudice.  The necessity for
a career forces every one to take sides.  We live in the age of the
overworked, and the under-educated; the age in which people are so
industrious that they become absolutely stupid.  And, harsh though it may
sound, I cannot help saying that such people deserve their doom.  The
sure way of knowing nothing about life is to try to make oneself useful.

ERNEST.  A charming doctrine, Gilbert.

GILBERT.  I am not sure about that, but it has at least the minor merit
of being true.  That the desire to do good to others produces a plentiful
crop of prigs is the least of the evils of which it is the cause.  The
prig is a very interesting psychological study, and though of all poses a
moral pose is the most offensive, still to have a pose at all is
something.  It is a formal recognition of the importance of treating life
from a definite and reasoned standpoint.  That Humanitarian Sympathy wars
against Nature, by securing the survival of the failure, may make the man
of science loathe its facile virtues.  The political economist may cry
out against it for putting the improvident on the same level as the
provident, and so robbing life of the strongest, because most sordid,
incentive to industry.  But, in the eyes of the thinker, the real harm
that emotional sympathy does is that it limits knowledge, and so prevents
us from solving any single social problem.  We are trying at present to
stave off the coming crisis, the coming revolution as my friends the
Fabianists call it, by means of doles and alms.  Well, when the
revolution or crisis arrives, we shall be powerless, because we shall
know nothing.  And so, Ernest, let us not be deceived.  England will
never be civilised till she has added Utopia to her dominions.  There is
more than one of her colonies that she might with advantage surrender for
so fair a land.  What we want are unpractical people who see beyond the
moment, and think beyond the day.  Those who try to lead the people can
only do so by following the mob.  It is through the voice of one crying
in the wilderness that the ways of the gods must be prepared.

But perhaps you think that in beholding for the mere joy of beholding,
and contemplating for the sake of contemplation, there is something that
is egotistic.  If you think so, do not say so.  It takes a thoroughly
selfish age, like our own, to deify self-sacrifice.  It takes a
thoroughly grasping age, such as that in which we live, to set above the
fine intellectual virtues, those shallow and emotional virtues that are
an immediate practical benefit to itself.  They miss their aim, too,
these philanthropists and sentimentalists of our day, who are always
chattering to one about one’s duty to one’s neighbour.  For the
development of the race depends on the development of the individual, and
where self-culture has ceased to be the ideal, the intellectual standard
is instantly lowered, and, often, ultimately lost.  If you meet at dinner
a man who has spent his life in educating himself—a rare type in our
time, I admit, but still one occasionally to be met with—you rise from
table richer, and conscious that a high ideal has for a moment touched
and sanctified your days.  But oh! my dear Ernest, to sit next to a man
who has spent his life in trying to educate others!  What a dreadful
experience that is!  How appalling is that ignorance which is the
inevitable result of the fatal habit of imparting opinions!  How limited
in range the creature’s mind proves to be!  How it wearies us, and must
weary himself, with its endless repetitions and sickly reiteration!  How
lacking it is in any element of intellectual growth!  In what a vicious
circle it always moves!

ERNEST.  You speak with strange feeling, Gilbert.  Have you had this
dreadful experience, as you call it, lately?

GILBERT.  Few of us escape it. People say that the schoolmaster is
abroad.  I wish to goodness he were.  But the type of which, after all,
he is only one, and certainly the least important, of the
representatives, seems to me to be really dominating our lives; and just
as the philanthropist is the nuisance of the ethical sphere, so the
nuisance of the intellectual sphere is the man who is so occupied in
trying to educate others, that he has never had any time to educate
himself.  No, Ernest, self-culture is the true ideal of man.  Goethe saw
it, and the immediate debt that we owe to Goethe is greater than the debt
we owe to any man since Greek days.  The Greeks saw it, and have left us,
as their legacy to modern thought, the conception of the contemplative
life as well as the critical method by which alone can that life be truly
realised.  It was the one thing that made the Renaissance great, and gave
us Humanism.  It is the one thing that could make our own age great also;
for the real weakness of England lies, not in incomplete armaments or
unfortified coasts, not in the poverty that creeps through sunless lanes,
or the drunkenness that brawls in loathsome courts, but simply in the
fact that her ideals are emotional and not intellectual.

I do not deny that the intellectual ideal is difficult of attainment,
still less that it is, and perhaps will be for years to come, unpopular
with the crowd.  It is so easy for people to have sympathy with
suffering.  It is so difficult for them to have sympathy with thought.
Indeed, so little do ordinary people understand what thought really is,
that they seem to imagine that, when they have said that a theory is
dangerous, they have pronounced its condemnation, whereas it is only such
theories that have any true intellectual value.  An idea that is not
dangerous is unworthy of being called an idea at all.

ERNEST.  Gilbert, you bewilder me.  You have told me that all art is, in
its essence, immoral.  Are you going to tell me now that all thought is,
in its essence, dangerous?

GILBERT.  Yes, in the practical sphere it is so.  The security of society
lies in custom and unconscious instinct, and the basis of the stability
of society, as a healthy organism, is the complete absence of any
intelligence amongst its members.  The great majority of people being
fully aware of this, rank themselves naturally on the side of that
splendid system that elevates them to the dignity of machines, and rage
so wildly against the intrusion of the intellectual faculty into any
question that concerns life, that one is tempted to define man as a
rational animal who always loses his temper when he is called upon to act
in accordance with the dictates of reason.  But let us turn from the
practical sphere, and say no more about the wicked philanthropists, who,
indeed, may well be left to the mercy of the almond-eyed sage of the
Yellow River Chuang Tsu the wise, who has proved that such well-meaning
and offensive busybodies have destroyed the simple and spontaneous virtue
that there is in man.  They are a wearisome topic, and I am anxious to
get back to the sphere in which criticism is free.

ERNEST.  The sphere of the intellect?

GILBERT.  Yes.  You remember that I spoke of the critic as being in his
own way as creative as the artist, whose work, indeed, may be merely of
value in so far as it gives to the critic a suggestion for some new mood
of thought and feeling which he can realise with equal, or perhaps
greater, distinction of form, and, through the use of a fresh medium of
expression, make differently beautiful and more perfect.  Well, you
seemed to be a little sceptical about the theory.  But perhaps I wronged
you?

ERNEST.  I am not really sceptical about it, but I must admit that I feel
very strongly that such work as you describe the critic producing—and
creative such work must undoubtedly be admitted to be—is, of necessity,
purely subjective, whereas the greatest work is objective always,
objective and impersonal.

GILBERT.  The difference between objective and subjective work is one of
external form merely.  It is accidental, not essential.  All artistic
creation is absolutely subjective.  The very landscape that Corot looked
at was, as he said himself, but a mood of his own mind; and those great
figures of Greek or English drama that seem to us to possess an actual
existence of their own, apart from the poets who shaped and fashioned
them, are, in their ultimate analysis, simply the poets themselves, not
as they thought they were, but as they thought they were not; and by such
thinking came in strange manner, though but for a moment, really so to
be.  For out of ourselves we can never pass, nor can there be in creation
what in the creator was not.  Nay, I would say that the more objective a
creation appears to be, the more subjective it really is.  Shakespeare
might have met Rosencrantz and Guildenstern in the white streets of
London, or seen the serving-men of rival houses bite their thumbs at each
other in the open square; but Hamlet came out of his soul, and Romeo out
of his passion.  They were elements of his nature to which he gave
visible form, impulses that stirred so strongly within him that he had,
as it were perforce, to suffer them to realise their energy, not on the
lower plane of actual life, where they would have been trammelled and
constrained and so made imperfect, but on that imaginative plane of art
where Love can indeed find in Death its rich fulfilment, where one can
stab the eavesdropper behind the arras, and wrestle in a new-made grave,
and make a guilty king drink his own hurt, and see one’s father’s spirit,
beneath the glimpses of the moon, stalking in complete steel from misty
wall to wall.  Action being limited would have left Shakespeare
unsatisfied and unexpressed; and, just as it is because he did nothing
that he has been able to achieve everything, so it is because he never
speaks to us of himself in his plays that his plays reveal him to us
absolutely, and show us his true nature and temperament far more
completely than do those strange and exquisite sonnets, even, in which he
bares to crystal eyes the secret closet of his heart.  Yes, the objective
form is the most subjective in matter.  Man is least himself when he
talks in his own person.  Give him a mask, and he will tell you the
truth.

ERNEST.  The critic, then, being limited to the subjective form, will
necessarily be less able fully to express himself than the artist, who
has always at his disposal the forms that are impersonal and objective.

GILBERT.  Not necessarily, and certainly not at all if he recognises that
each mode of criticism is, in its highest development, simply a mood, and
that we are never more true to ourselves than when we are inconsistent.
The æsthetic critic, constant only to the principle of beauty in all
things, will ever be looking for fresh impressions, winning from the
various schools the secret of their charm, bowing, it may be, before
foreign altars, or smiling, if it be his fancy, at strange new gods.
What other people call one’s past has, no doubt, everything to do with
them, but has absolutely nothing to do with oneself.  The man who regards
his past is a man who deserves to have no future to look forward to.
When one has found expression for a mood, one has done with it.  You
laugh; but believe me it is so.  Yesterday it was Realism that charmed
one.  One gained from it that _nouveau frisson_ which it was its aim to
produce.  One analysed it, explained it, and wearied of it.  At sunset
came the _Luministe_ in painting, and the _Symboliste_ in poetry, and the
spirit of mediævalism, that spirit which belongs not to time but to
temperament, woke suddenly in wounded Russia, and stirred us for a moment
by the terrible fascination of pain.  To-day the cry is for Romance, and
already the leaves are tremulous in the valley, and on the purple
hill-tops walks Beauty with slim gilded feet.  The old modes of creation
linger, of course.  The artists reproduce either themselves or each
other, with wearisome iteration.  But Criticism is always moving on, and
the critic is always developing.

Nor, again, is the critic really limited to the subjective form of
expression.  The method of the drama is his, as well as the method of the
epos.  He may use dialogue, as he did who set Milton talking to Marvel on
the nature of comedy and tragedy, and made Sidney and Lord Brooke
discourse on letters beneath the Penshurst oaks; or adopt narration, as
Mr. Pater is fond of doing, each of whose Imaginary Portraits—is not that
the title of the book?—presents to us, under the fanciful guise of
fiction, some fine and exquisite piece of criticism, one on the painter
Watteau, another on the philosophy of Spinoza, a third on the Pagan
elements of the early Renaissance, and the last, and in some respects the
most suggestive, on the source of that Aufklärung, that enlightening
which dawned on Germany in the last century, and to which our own culture
owes so great a debt.  Dialogue, certainly, that wonderful literary form
which, from Plato to Lucian, and from Lucian to Giordano Bruno, and from
Bruno to that grand old Pagan in whom Carlyle took such delight, the
creative critics of the world have always employed, can never lose for
the thinker its attraction as a mode of expression.  By its means he can
both reveal and conceal himself, and give form to every fancy, and
reality to every mood.  By its means he can exhibit the object from each
point of view, and show it to us in the round, as a sculptor shows us
things, gaining in this manner all the richness and reality of effect
that comes from those side issues that are suddenly suggested by the
central idea in its progress, and really illumine the idea more
completely, or from those felicitous after-thoughts that give a fuller
completeness to the central scheme, and yet convey something of the
delicate charm of chance.

ERNEST.  By its means, too, he can invent an imaginary antagonist, and
convert him when he chooses by some absurdly sophistical argument.

GILBERT.  Ah! it is so easy to convert others.  It is so difficult to
convert oneself.  To arrive at what one really believes, one must speak
through lips different from one’s own.  To know the truth one must
imagine myriads of falsehoods.  For what is Truth?  In matters of
religion, it is simply the opinion that has survived.  In matters of
science, it is the ultimate sensation.  In matters of art, it is one’s
last mood.  And you see now, Ernest, that the critic has at his disposal
as many objective forms of expression as the artist has.  Ruskin put his
criticism into imaginative prose, and is superb in his changes and
contradictions; and Browning put his into blank verse and made painter
and poet yield us their secret; and M. Renan uses dialogue, and Mr. Pater
fiction, and Rossetti translated into sonnet-music the colour of
Giorgione and the design of Ingres, and his own design and colour also,
feeling, with the instinct of one who had many modes of utterance; that
the ultimate art is literature, and the finest and fullest medium that of
words.

ERNEST.  Well, now that you have settled that the critic has at his
disposal all objective forms, I wish you would tell me what are the
qualities that should characterise the true critic.

GILBERT.  What would you say they were?

ERNEST.  Well, I should say that a critic should above all things be
fair.

GILBERT.  Ah! not fair.  A critic cannot be fair in the ordinary sense of
the word.  It is only about things that do not interest one that one can
give a really unbiassed opinion, which is no doubt the reason why an
unbiassed opinion is always absolutely valueless.  The man who sees both
sides of a question, is a man who sees absolutely nothing at all.  Art is
a passion, and, in matters of art, Thought is inevitably coloured by
emotion, and so is fluid rather than fixed, and, depending upon fine
moods and exquisite moments, cannot be narrowed into the rigidity of a
scientific formula or a theological dogma.  It is to the soul that Art
speaks, and the soul may be made the prisoner of the mind as well as of
the body.  One should, of course, have no prejudices; but, as a great
Frenchman remarked a hundred years ago, it is one’s business in such
matters to have preferences, and when one has preferences one ceases to
be fair.  It is only an auctioneer who can equally and impartially admire
all schools of Art.  No; fairness is not one of the qualities of the true
critic.  It is not even a condition of criticism.  Each form of Art with
which we come in contact dominates us for the moment to the exclusion of
every other form.  We must surrender ourselves absolutely to the work in
question, whatever it may be, if we wish to gain its secret.  For the
time, we must think of nothing else, can think of nothing else, indeed.

ERNEST.  The true critic will be rational, at any rate, will he not?

GILBERT.  Rational?  There are two ways of disliking art, Ernest.  One is
to dislike it.  The other, to like it rationally.  For Art, as Plato saw,
and not without regret, creates in listener and spectator a form of
divine madness.  It does not spring from inspiration, but it makes others
inspired.  Reason is not the faculty to which it appeals.  If one loves
Art at all, one must love it beyond all other things in the world, and
against such love, the reason, if one listened to it, would cry out.
There is nothing sane about the worship of beauty.  It is too splendid to
be sane.  Those of whose lives it forms the dominant note will always
seem to the world to be pure visionaries.

ERNEST.  Well, at least, the critic will be sincere.

GILBERT.  A little sincerity is a dangerous thing, and a great deal of it
is absolutely fatal.  The true critic will, indeed, always be sincere in
his devotion to the principle of beauty, but he will seek for beauty in
every age and in each school, and will never suffer himself to be limited
to any settled custom of thought or stereotyped mode of looking at
things.  He will realise himself in many forms, and by a thousand
different ways, and will ever be curious of new sensations and fresh
points of view.  Through constant change, and through constant change
alone, he will find his true unity.  He will not consent to be the slave
of his own opinions.  For what is mind but motion in the intellectual
sphere?  The essence of thought, as the essence of life, is growth.  You
must not be frightened by word, Ernest.  What people call insincerity is
simply a method by which we can multiply our personalities.

ERNEST.  I am afraid I have not been fortunate in my suggestions.

GILBERT.  Of the three qualifications you mentioned, two, sincerity and
fairness, were, if not actually moral, at least on the borderland of
morals, and the first condition of criticism is that the critic should be
able to recognise that the sphere of Art and the sphere of Ethics are
absolutely distinct and separate.  When they are confused, Chaos has come
again.  They are too often confused in England now, and though our modern
Puritans cannot destroy a beautiful thing, yet, by means of their
extraordinary prurience, they can almost taint beauty for a moment.  It
is chiefly, I regret to say, through journalism that such people find
expression.  I regret it because there is much to be said in favour of
modern journalism.  By giving us the opinions of the uneducated, it keeps
us in touch with the ignorance of the community.  By carefully
chronicling the current events of contemporary life, it shows us of what
very little importance such events really are.  By invariably discussing
the unnecessary it makes us understand what things are requisite for
culture, and what are not.  But it should not allow poor Tartuffe to
write articles upon modern art.  When it does this it stultifies itself.
And yet Tartuffe’s articles and Chadband’s notes do this good, at least.
They serve to show how extremely limited is the area over which ethics,
and ethical considerations, can claim to exercise influence.  Science is
out of the reach of morals, for her eyes are fixed upon eternal truths.
Art is out of the reach of morals, for her eyes are fixed upon things
beautiful and immortal and ever-changing.  To morals belong the lower and
less intellectual spheres.  However, let these mouthing Puritans pass;
they have their comic side.  Who can help laughing when an ordinary
journalist seriously proposes to limit the subject-matter at the disposal
of the artist?  Some limitation might well, and will soon, I hope, be
placed upon some of our newspapers and newspaper writers.  For they give
us the bald, sordid, disgusting facts of life.  They chronicle, with
degrading avidity, the sins of the second-rate, and with the
conscientiousness of the illiterate give us accurate and prosaic details
of the doings of people of absolutely no interest whatsoever.  But the
artist, who accepts the facts of life, and yet transforms them into
shapes of beauty, and makes them vehicles of pity or of awe, and shows
their colour-element, and their wonder, and their true ethical import
also, and builds out of them a world more real than reality itself, and
of loftier and more noble import—who shall set limits to him?  Not the
apostles of that new Journalism which is but the old vulgarity ‘writ
large.’  Not the apostles of that new Puritanism, which is but the whine
of the hypocrite, and is both writ and spoken badly.  The mere suggestion
is ridiculous.  Let us leave these wicked people, and proceed to the
discussion of the artistic qualifications necessary for the true critic.

ERNEST.  And what are they?  Tell me yourself.

GILBERT.  Temperament is the primary requisite for the critic—a
temperament exquisitely susceptible to beauty, and to the various
impressions that beauty gives us.  Under what conditions, and by what
means, this temperament is engendered in race or individual, we will not
discuss at present.  It is sufficient to note that it exists, and that
there is in us a beauty-sense, separate from the other senses and above
them, separate from the reason and of nobler import, separate from the
soul and of equal value—a sense that leads some to create, and others,
the finer spirits as I think, to contemplate merely.  But to be purified
and made perfect, this sense requires some form of exquisite environment.
Without this it starves, or is dulled.  You remember that lovely passage
in which Plato describes how a young Greek should be educated, and with
what insistence he dwells upon the importance of surroundings, telling us
how the lad is to be brought up in the midst of fair sights and sounds,
so that the beauty of material things may prepare his soul for the
reception of the beauty that is spiritual.  Insensibly, and without
knowing the reason why, he is to develop that real love of beauty which,
as Plato is never weary of reminding us, is the true aim of education.
By slow degrees there is to be engendered in him such a temperament as
will lead him naturally and simply to choose the good in preference to
the bad, and, rejecting what is vulgar and discordant, to follow by fine
instinctive taste all that possesses grace and charm and loveliness.
Ultimately, in its due course, this taste is to become critical and
self-conscious, but at first it is to exist purely as a cultivated
instinct, and ‘he who has received this true culture of the inner man
will with clear and certain vision perceive the omissions and faults in
art or nature, and with a taste that cannot err, while he praises, and
finds his pleasure in what is good, and receives it into his soul, and so
becomes good and noble, he will rightly blame and hate the bad, now in
the days of his youth, even before he is able to know the reason why’:
and so, when, later on, the critical and self-conscious spirit develops
in him, he ‘will recognise and salute it as a friend with whom his
education has made him long familiar.’  I need hardly say, Ernest, how
far we in England have fallen short of this ideal, and I can imagine the
smile that would illuminate the glossy face of the Philistine if one
ventured to suggest to him that the true aim of education was the love of
beauty, and that the methods by which education should work were the
development of temperament, the cultivation of taste, and the creation of
the critical spirit.

Yet, even for us, there is left some loveliness of environment, and the
dulness of tutors and professors matters very little when one can loiter
in the grey cloisters at Magdalen, and listen to some flute-like voice
singing in Waynfleete’s chapel, or lie in the green meadow, among the
strange snake-spotted fritillaries, and watch the sunburnt noon smite to
a finer gold the tower’s gilded vanes, or wander up the Christ Church
staircase beneath the vaulted ceiling’s shadowy fans, or pass through the
sculptured gateway of Laud’s building in the College of St. John.  Nor is
it merely at Oxford, or Cambridge, that the sense of beauty can be formed
and trained and perfected.  All over England there is a Renaissance of
the decorative Arts.  Ugliness has had its day.  Even in the houses of
the rich there is taste, and the houses of those who are not rich have
been made gracious and comely and sweet to live in.  Caliban, poor noisy
Caliban, thinks that when he has ceased to make mows at a thing, the
thing ceases to exist.  But if he mocks no longer, it is because he has
been met with mockery, swifter and keener than his own, and for a moment
has been bitterly schooled into that silence which should seal for ever
his uncouth distorted lips.  What has been done up to now, has been
chiefly in the clearing of the way.  It is always more difficult to
destroy than it is to create, and when what one has to destroy is
vulgarity and stupidity, the task of destruction needs not merely courage
but also contempt.  Yet it seems to me to have been, in a measure, done.
We have got rid of what was bad.  We have now to make what is beautiful.
And though the mission of the æsthetic movement is to lure people to
contemplate, not to lead them to create, yet, as the creative instinct is
strong in the Celt, and it is the Celt who leads in art, there is no
reason why in future years this strange Renaissance should not become
almost as mighty in its way as was that new birth of Art that woke many
centuries ago in the cities of Italy.

Certainly, for the cultivation of temperament, we must turn to the
decorative arts: to the arts that touch us, not to the arts that teach
us.  Modern pictures are, no doubt, delightful to look at.  At least,
some of them are.  But they are quite impossible to live with; they are
too clever, too assertive, too intellectual.  Their meaning is too
obvious, and their method too clearly defined.  One exhausts what they
have to say in a very short time, and then they become as tedious as
one’s relations.  I am very fond of the work of many of the Impressionist
painters of Paris and London.  Subtlety and distinction have not yet left
the school.  Some of their arrangements and harmonies serve to remind one
of the unapproachable beauty of Gautier’s immortal _Symphonie en Blanc
Majeur_, that flawless masterpiece of colour and music which may have
suggested the type as well as the titles of many of their best pictures.
For a class that welcomes the incompetent with sympathetic eagerness, and
that confuses the bizarre with the beautiful, and vulgarity with truth,
they are extremely accomplished.  They can do etchings that have the
brilliancy of epigrams, pastels that are as fascinating as paradoxes, and
as for their portraits, whatever the commonplace may say against them, no
one can deny that they possess that unique and wonderful charm which
belongs to works of pure fiction.  But even the Impressionists, earnest
and industrious as they are, will not do.  I like them.  Their white
keynote, with its variations in lilac, was an era in colour.  Though the
moment does not make the man, the moment certainly makes the
Impressionist, and for the moment in art, and the ‘moment’s monument,’ as
Rossetti phrased it, what may not be said?  They are suggestive also.  If
they have not opened the eyes of the blind, they have at least given
great encouragement to the short-sighted, and while their leaders may
have all the inexperience of old age, their young men are far too wise to
be ever sensible.  Yet they will insist on treating painting as if it
were a mode of autobiography invented for the use of the illiterate, and
are always prating to us on their coarse gritty canvases of their
unnecessary selves and their unnecessary opinions, and spoiling by a
vulgar over-emphasis that fine contempt of nature which is the best and
only modest thing about them.  One tires, at the end, of the work of
individuals whose individuality is always noisy, and generally
uninteresting.  There is far more to be said in favour of that newer
school at Paris, the _Archaicistes_, as they call themselves, who,
refusing to leave the artist entirely at the mercy of the weather, do not
find the ideal of art in mere atmospheric effect, but seek rather for the
imaginative beauty of design and the loveliness of fair colour, and
rejecting the tedious realism of those who merely paint what they see,
try to see something worth seeing, and to see it not merely with actual
and physical vision, but with that nobler vision of the soul which is as
far wider in spiritual scope as it is far more splendid in artistic
purpose.  They, at any rate, work under those decorative conditions that
each art requires for its perfection, and have sufficient æsthetic
instinct to regret those sordid and stupid limitations of absolute
modernity of form which have proved the ruin of so many of the
Impressionists.  Still, the art that is frankly decorative is the art to
live with.  It is, of all our visible arts, the one art that creates in
us both mood and temperament.  Mere colour, unspoiled by meaning, and
unallied with definite form, can speak to the soul in a thousand
different ways.  The harmony that resides in the delicate proportions of
lines and masses becomes mirrored in the mind.  The repetitions of
pattern give us rest.  The marvels of design stir the imagination.  In
the mere loveliness of the materials employed there are latent elements
of culture.  Nor is this all.  By its deliberate rejection of Nature as
the ideal of beauty, as well as of the imitative method of the ordinary
painter, decorative art not merely prepares the soul for the reception of
true imaginative work, but develops in it that sense of form which is the
basis of creative no less than of critical achievement.  For the real
artist is he who proceeds, not from feeling to form, but from form to
thought and passion.  He does not first conceive an idea, and then say to
himself, ‘I will put my idea into a complex metre of fourteen lines,’
but, realising the beauty of the sonnet-scheme, he conceives certain
modes of music and methods of rhyme, and the mere form suggests what is
to fill it and make it intellectually and emotionally complete.  From
time to time the world cries out against some charming artistic poet,
because, to use its hackneyed and silly phrase, he has ‘nothing to say.’
But if he had something to say, he would probably say it, and the result
would be tedious.  It is just because he has no new message, that he can
do beautiful work.  He gains his inspiration from form, and from form
purely, as an artist should.  A real passion would ruin him.  Whatever
actually occurs is spoiled for art.  All bad poetry springs from genuine
feeling.  To be natural is to be obvious, and to be obvious is to be
inartistic.

ERNEST.  I wonder do you really believe what you say?

GILBERT.  Why should you wonder?  It is not merely in art that the body
is the soul.  In every sphere of life Form is the beginning of things.
The rhythmic harmonious gestures of dancing convey, Plato tells us, both
rhythm and harmony into the mind.  Forms are the food of faith, cried
Newman in one of those great moments of sincerity that make us admire and
know the man.  He was right, though he may not have known how terribly
right he was.  The Creeds are believed, not because they are rational,
but because they are repeated.  Yes: Form is everything.  It is the
secret of life.  Find expression for a sorrow, and it will become dear to
you.  Find expression for a joy, and you intensify its ecstasy.  Do you
wish to love?  Use Love’s Litany, and the words will create the yearning
from which the world fancies that they spring.  Have you a grief that
corrodes your heart?  Steep yourself in the Language of grief, learn its
utterance from Prince Hamlet and Queen Constance, and you will find that
mere expression is a mode of consolation, and that Form, which is the
birth of passion, is also the death of pain.  And so, to return to the
sphere of Art, it is Form that creates not merely the critical
temperament, but also the æsthetic instinct, that unerring instinct that
reveals to one all things under their conditions of beauty.  Start with
the worship of form, and there is no secret in art that will not be
revealed to you, and remember that in criticism, as in creation,
temperament is everything, and that it is, not by the time of their
production, but by the temperaments to which they appeal, that the
schools of art should be historically grouped.

ERNEST.  Your theory of education is delightful.  But what influence will
your critic, brought up in these exquisite surroundings, possess?  Do you
really think that any artist is ever affected by criticism?

GILBERT.  The influence of the critic will be the mere fact of his own
existence.  He will represent the flawless type.  In him the culture of
the century will see itself realised.  You must not ask of him to have
any aim other than the perfecting of himself.  The demand of the
intellect, as has been well said, is simply to feel itself alive.  The
critic may, indeed, desire to exercise influence; but, if so, he will
concern himself not with the individual, but with the age, which he will
seek to wake into consciousness, and to make responsive, creating in it
new desires and appetites, and lending it his larger vision and his
nobler moods.  The actual art of to-day will occupy him less than the art
of to-morrow, far less than the art of yesterday, and as for this or that
person at present toiling away, what do the industrious matter?  They do
their best, no doubt, and consequently we get the worst from them.  It is
always with the best intentions that the worst work is done.  And
besides, my dear Ernest, when a man reaches the age of forty, or becomes
a Royal Academician, or is elected a member of the Athenæum Club, or is
recognised as a popular novelist, whose books are in great demand at
suburban railway stations, one may have the amusement of exposing him,
but one cannot have the pleasure of reforming him.  And this is, I dare
say, very fortunate for him; for I have no doubt that reformation is a
much more painful process than punishment, is indeed punishment in its
most aggravated and moral form—a fact which accounts for our entire
failure as a community to reclaim that interesting phenomenon who is
called the confirmed criminal.

ERNEST.  But may it not be that the poet is the best judge of poetry, and
the painter of painting?  Each art must appeal primarily to the artist
who works in it.  His judgment will surely be the most valuable?

GILBERT.  The appeal of all art is simply to the artistic temperament.
Art does not address herself to the specialist.  Her claim is that she is
universal, and that in all her manifestations she is one.  Indeed, so far
from its being true that the artist is the best judge of art, a really
great artist can never judge of other people’s work at all, and can
hardly, in fact, judge of his own.  That very concentration of vision
that makes a man an artist, limits by its sheer intensity his faculty of
fine appreciation.  The energy of creation hurries him blindly on to his
own goal.  The wheels of his chariot raise the dust as a cloud around
him.  The gods are hidden from each other.  They can recognise their
worshippers.  That is all.

ERNEST.  You say that a great artist cannot recognise the beauty of work
different from his own.

GILBERT.  It is impossible for him to do so.  Wordsworth saw in
_Endymion_ merely a pretty piece of Paganism, and Shelley, with his
dislike of actuality, was deaf to Wordsworth’s message, being repelled by
its form, and Byron, that great passionate human incomplete creature,
could appreciate neither the poet of the cloud nor the poet of the lake,
and the wonder of Keats was hidden from him.  The realism of Euripides
was hateful to Sophokles.  Those droppings of warm tears had no music for
him.  Milton, with his sense of the grand style, could not understand the
method of Shakespeare, any more than could Sir Joshua the method of
Gainsborough.  Bad artists always admire each other’s work.  They call it
being large-minded and free from prejudice.  But a truly great artist
cannot conceive of life being shown, or beauty fashioned, under any
conditions other than those that he has selected.  Creation employs all
its critical faculty within its own sphere.  It may not use it in the
sphere that belongs to others.  It is exactly because a man cannot do a
thing that he is the proper judge of it.

ERNEST.  Do you really mean that?

GILBERT.  Yes, for creation limits, while contemplation widens, the
vision.

ERNEST.  But what about technique?  Surely each art has its separate
technique?

GILBERT.  Certainly: each art has its grammar and its materials.  There
is no mystery about either, and the incompetent can always be correct.
But, while the laws upon which Art rests may be fixed and certain, to
find their true realisation they must be touched by the imagination into
such beauty that they will seem an exception, each one of them.
Technique is really personality.  That is the reason why the artist
cannot teach it, why the pupil cannot learn it, and why the æsthetic
critic can understand it.  To the great poet, there is only one method of
music—his own.  To the great painter, there is only one manner of
painting—that which he himself employs.  The æsthetic critic, and the
æsthetic critic alone, can appreciate all forms and modes.  It is to him
that Art makes her appeal.

ERNEST.  Well, I think I have put all my questions to you.  And now I
must admit—

GILBERT.  Ah! don’t say that you agree with me.  When people agree with
me I always feel that I must be wrong.

ERNEST.  In that case I certainly won’t tell you whether I agree with you
or not.  But I will put another question.  You have explained to me that
criticism is a creative art.  What future has it?

GILBERT.  It is to criticism that the future belongs.  The subject-matter
at the disposal of creation becomes every day more limited in extent and
variety.  Providence and Mr. Walter Besant have exhausted the obvious.
If creation is to last at all, it can only do so on the condition of
becoming far more critical than it is at present.  The old roads and
dusty highways have been traversed too often.  Their charm has been worn
away by plodding feet, and they have lost that element of novelty or
surprise which is so essential for romance.  He who would stir us now by
fiction must either give us an entirely new background, or reveal to us
the soul of man in its innermost workings.  The first is for the moment
being done for us by Mr. Rudyard Kipling.  As one turns over the pages of
his _Plain Tales from the Hills_, one feels as if one were seated under a
palm-tree reading life by superb flashes of vulgarity.  The bright
colours of the bazaars dazzle one’s eyes.  The jaded, second-rate
Anglo-Indians are in exquisite incongruity with their surroundings.  The
mere lack of style in the story-teller gives an odd journalistic realism
to what he tells us.  From the point of view of literature Mr. Kipling is
a genius who drops his aspirates.  From the point of view of life, he is
a reporter who knows vulgarity better than any one has ever known it.
Dickens knew its clothes and its comedy.  Mr. Kipling knows its essence
and its seriousness.  He is our first authority on the second-rate, and
has seen marvellous things through keyholes, and his backgrounds are real
works of art.  As for the second condition, we have had Browning, and
Meredith is with us.  But there is still much to be done in the sphere of
introspection.  People sometimes say that fiction is getting too morbid.
As far as psychology is concerned, it has never been morbid enough.  We
have merely touched the surface of the soul, that is all.  In one single
ivory cell of the brain there are stored away things more marvellous and
more terrible than even they have dreamed of, who, like the author of _Le
Rouge et le Noir_, have sought to track the soul into its most secret
places, and to make life confess its dearest sins.  Still, there is a
limit even to the number of untried backgrounds, and it is possible that
a further development of the habit of introspection may prove fatal to
that creative faculty to which it seeks to supply fresh material.  I
myself am inclined to think that creation is doomed.  It springs from too
primitive, too natural an impulse.  However this may be, it is certain
that the subject-matter at the disposal of creation is always
diminishing, while the subject-matter of criticism increases daily.
There are always new attitudes for the mind, and new points of view.  The
duty of imposing form upon chaos does not grow less as the world
advances.  There was never a time when Criticism was more needed than it
is now.  It is only by its means that Humanity can become conscious of
the point at which it has arrived.

Hours ago, Ernest, you asked me the use of Criticism.  You might just as
well have asked me the use of thought.  It is Criticism, as Arnold points
out, that creates the intellectual atmosphere of the age.  It is
Criticism, as I hope to point out myself some day, that makes the mind a
fine instrument.  We, in our educational system, have burdened the memory
with a load of unconnected facts, and laboriously striven to impart our
laboriously-acquired knowledge.  We teach people how to remember, we
never teach them how to grow.  It has never occurred to us to try and
develop in the mind a more subtle quality of apprehension and
discernment.  The Greeks did this, and when we come in contact with the
Greek critical intellect, we cannot but be conscious that, while our
subject-matter is in every respect larger and more varied than theirs,
theirs is the only method by which this subject-matter can be
interpreted.  England has done one thing; it has invented and established
Public Opinion, which is an attempt to organise the ignorance of the
community, and to elevate it to the dignity of physical force.  But
Wisdom has always been hidden from it.  Considered as an instrument of
thought, the English mind is coarse and undeveloped.  The only thing that
can purify it is the growth of the critical instinct.

It is Criticism, again, that, by concentration, makes culture possible.
It takes the cumbersome mass of creative work, and distils it into a
finer essence.  Who that desires to retain any sense of form could
struggle through the monstrous multitudinous books that the world has
produced, books in which thought stammers or ignorance brawls?  The
thread that is to guide us across the wearisome labyrinth is in the hands
of Criticism.  Nay more, where there is no record, and history is either
lost, or was never written, Criticism can re-create the past for us from
the very smallest fragment of language or art, just as surely as the man
of science can from some tiny bone, or the mere impress of a foot upon a
rock, re-create for us the winged dragon or Titan lizard that once made
the earth shake beneath its tread, can call Behemoth out of his cave, and
make Leviathan swim once more across the startled sea.  Prehistoric
history belongs to the philological and archæological critic.  It is to
him that the origins of things are revealed.  The self-conscious deposits
of an age are nearly always misleading.  Through philological criticism
alone we know more of the centuries of which no actual record has been
preserved, than we do of the centuries that have left us their scrolls.
It can do for us what can be done neither by physics nor metaphysics.  It
can give us the exact science of mind in the process of becoming.  It can
do for us what History cannot do.  It can tell us what man thought before
he learned how to write.  You have asked me about the influence of
Criticism.  I think I have answered that question already; but there is
this also to be said.  It is Criticism that makes us cosmopolitan.  The
Manchester school tried to make men realise the brotherhood of humanity,
by pointing out the commercial advantages of peace.  It sought to degrade
the wonderful world into a common market-place for the buyer and the
seller.  It addressed itself to the lowest instincts, and it failed.  War
followed upon war, and the tradesman’s creed did not prevent France and
Germany from clashing together in blood-stained battle.  There are others
of our own day who seek to appeal to mere emotional sympathies, or to the
shallow dogmas of some vague system of abstract ethics.  They have their
Peace Societies, so dear to the sentimentalists, and their proposals for
unarmed International Arbitration, so popular among those who have never
read history.  But mere emotional sympathy will not do.  It is too
variable, and too closely connected with the passions; and a board of
arbitrators who, for the general welfare of the race, are to be deprived
of the power of putting their decisions into execution, will not be of
much avail.  There is only one thing worse than Injustice, and that is
Justice without her sword in her hand.  When Right is not Might, it is
Evil.

No: the emotions will not make us cosmopolitan, any more than the greed
for gain could do so.  It is only by the cultivation of the habit of
intellectual criticism that we shall be able to rise superior to
race-prejudices.  Goethe—you will not misunderstand what I say—was a
German of the Germans.  He loved his country—no man more so.  Its people
were dear to him; and he led them.  Yet, when the iron hoof of Napoleon
trampled upon vineyard and cornfield, his lips were silent.  ‘How can one
write songs of hatred without hating?’ he said to Eckermann, ‘and how
could I, to whom culture and barbarism are alone of importance, hate a
nation which is among the most cultivated of the earth and to which I owe
so great a part of my own cultivation?’  This note, sounded in the modern
world by Goethe first, will become, I think, the starting point for the
cosmopolitanism of the future.  Criticism will annihilate
race-prejudices, by insisting upon the unity of the human mind in the
variety of its forms.  If we are tempted to make war upon another nation,
we shall remember that we are seeking to destroy an element of our own
culture, and possibly its most important element.  As long as war is
regarded as wicked, it will always have its fascination.  When it is
looked upon as vulgar, it will cease to be popular.  The change will of
course be slow, and people will not be conscious of it.  They will not
say ‘We will not war against France because her prose is perfect,’ but
because the prose of France is perfect, they will not hate the land.
Intellectual criticism will bind Europe together in bonds far closer than
those that can be forged by shopman or sentimentalist.  It will give us
the peace that springs from understanding.

Nor is this all.  It is Criticism that, recognising no position as final,
and refusing to bind itself by the shallow shibboleths of any sect or
school, creates that serene philosophic temper which loves truth for its
own sake, and loves it not the less because it knows it to be
unattainable.  How little we have of this temper in England, and how much
we need it!  The English mind is always in a rage.  The intellect of the
race is wasted in the sordid and stupid quarrels of second-rate
politicians or third-rate theologians.  It was reserved for a man of
science to show us the supreme example of that ‘sweet reasonableness’ of
which Arnold spoke so wisely, and, alas! to so little effect.  The author
of the _Origin of Species_ had, at any rate, the philosophic temper.  If
one contemplates the ordinary pulpits and platforms of England, one can
but feel the contempt of Julian, or the indifference of Montaigne.  We
are dominated by the fanatic, whose worst vice is his sincerity.
Anything approaching to the free play of the mind is practically unknown
amongst us.  People cry out against the sinner, yet it is not the sinful,
but the stupid, who are our shame.  There is no sin except stupidity.

ERNEST.  Ah! what an antinomian you are!

GILBERT.  The artistic critic, like the mystic, is an antinomian always.
To be good, according to the vulgar standard of goodness, is obviously
quite easy.  It merely requires a certain amount of sordid terror, a
certain lack of imaginative thought, and a certain low passion for
middle-class respectability.  Æsthetics are higher than ethics.  They
belong to a more spiritual sphere.  To discern the beauty of a thing is
the finest point to which we can arrive.  Even a colour-sense is more
important, in the development of the individual, than a sense of right
and wrong.  Æsthetics, in fact, are to Ethics in the sphere of conscious
civilisation, what, in the sphere of the external world, sexual is to
natural selection.  Ethics, like natural selection, make existence
possible.  Æsthetics, like sexual selection, make life lovely and
wonderful, fill it with new forms, and give it progress, and variety and
change.  And when we reach the true culture that is our aim, we attain to
that perfection of which the saints have dreamed, the perfection of those
to whom sin is impossible, not because they make the renunciations of the
ascetic, but because they can do everything they wish without hurt to the
soul, and can wish for nothing that can do the soul harm, the soul being
an entity so divine that it is able to transform into elements of a
richer experience, or a finer susceptibility, or a newer mode of thought,
acts or passions that with the common would be commonplace, or with the
uneducated ignoble, or with the shameful vile.  Is this dangerous?  Yes;
it is dangerous—all ideas, as I told you, are so.  But the night wearies,
and the light flickers in the lamp.  One more thing I cannot help saying
to you.  You have spoken against Criticism as being a sterile thing.  The
nineteenth century is a turning point in history, simply on account of
the work of two men, Darwin and Renan, the one the critic of the Book of
Nature, the other the critic of the books of God.  Not to recognise this
is to miss the meaning of one of the most important eras in the progress
of the world.  Creation is always behind the age.  It is Criticism that
leads us.  The Critical Spirit and the World-Spirit are one.

ERNEST.  And he who is in possession of this spirit, or whom this spirit
possesses, will, I suppose, do nothing?

GILBERT.  Like the Persephone of whom Landor tells us, the sweet pensive
Persephone around whose white feet the asphodel and amaranth are
blooming, he will sit contented ‘in that deep, motionless quiet which
mortals pity, and which the gods enjoy.’  He will look out upon the world
and know its secret.  By contact with divine things he will become
divine.  His will be the perfect life, and his only.

ERNEST.  You have told me many strange things to-night, Gilbert.  You
have told me that it is more difficult to talk about a thing than to do
it, and that to do nothing at all is the most difficult thing in the
world; you have told me that all Art is immoral, and all thought
dangerous; that criticism is more creative than creation, and that the
highest criticism is that which reveals in the work of Art what the
artist had not put there; that it is exactly because a man cannot do a
thing that he is the proper judge of it; and that the true critic is
unfair, insincere, and not rational.  My friend, you are a dreamer.

GILBERT.  Yes: I am a dreamer.  For a dreamer is one who can only find
his way by moonlight, and his punishment is that he sees the dawn before
the rest of the world.

ERNEST.  His punishment?

GILBERT.  And his reward.  But, see, it is dawn already.  Draw back the
curtains and open the windows wide.  How cool the morning air is!
Piccadilly lies at our feet like a long riband of silver.  A faint purple
mist hangs over the Park, and the shadows of the white houses are purple.
It is too late to sleep.  Let us go down to Covent Garden and look at the
roses.  Come!  I am tired of thought.




THE TRUTH OF MASKS
A NOTE ON ILLUSION


IN many of the somewhat violent attacks that have recently been made on
that splendour of mounting which now characterises our Shakespearian
revivals in England, it seems to have been tacitly assumed by the critics
that Shakespeare himself was more or less indifferent to the costumes of
his actors, and that, could he see Mrs. Langtry’s production of _Antony
and Cleopatra_, he would probably say that the play, and the play only,
is the thing, and that everything else is leather and prunella.  While,
as regards any historical accuracy in dress, Lord Lytton, in an article
in the _Nineteenth Century_, has laid it down as a dogma of art that
archæology is entirely out of place in the presentation of any of
Shakespeare’s plays, and the attempt to introduce it one of the stupidest
pedantries of an age of prigs.

Lord Lytton’s position I shall examine later on; but, as regards the
theory that Shakespeare did not busy himself much about the
costume-wardrobe of his theatre, anybody who cares to study Shakespeare’s
method will see that there is absolutely no dramatist of the French,
English, or Athenian stage who relies so much for his illusionist effects
on the dress of his actors as Shakespeare does himself.

Knowing how the artistic temperament is always fascinated by beauty of
costume, he constantly introduces into his plays masques and dances,
purely for the sake of the pleasure which they give the eye; and we have
still his stage-directions for the three great processions in _Henry the
Eighth_, directions which are characterised by the most extraordinary
elaborateness of detail down to the collars of S.S. and the pearls in
Anne Boleyn’s hair.  Indeed it would be quite easy for a modern manager
to reproduce these pageants absolutely as Shakespeare had them designed;
and so accurate were they that one of the court officials of the time,
writing an account of the last performance of the play at the Globe
Theatre to a friend, actually complains of their realistic character,
notably of the production on the stage of the Knights of the Garter in
the robes and insignia of the order as being calculated to bring ridicule
on the real ceremonies; much in the same spirit in which the French
Government, some time ago, prohibited that delightful actor, M.
Christian, from appearing in uniform, on the plea that it was prejudicial
to the glory of the army that a colonel should be caricatured.  And
elsewhere the gorgeousness of apparel which distinguished the English
stage under Shakespeare’s influence was attacked by the contemporary
critics, not as a rule, however, on the grounds of the democratic
tendencies of realism, but usually on those moral grounds which are
always the last refuge of people who have no sense of beauty.

The point, however, which I wish to emphasise is, not that Shakespeare
appreciated the value of lovely costumes in adding picturesqueness to
poetry, but that he saw how important costume is as a means of producing
certain dramatic effects.  Many of his plays, such as _Measure for
Measure_, _Twelfth Night_, _The Two Gentleman of Verona_, _All’s Well
that Ends Well_, _Cymbeline_, and others, depend for their illusion on
the character of the various dresses worn by the hero or the heroine; the
delightful scene in _Henry the Sixth_, on the modern miracles of healing
by faith, loses all its point unless Gloster is in black and scarlet; and
the _dénoûment_ of the _Merry Wives of Windsor_ hinges on the colour of
Anne Page’s gown.  As for the uses Shakespeare makes of disguises the
instances are almost numberless.  Posthumus hides his passion under a
peasant’s garb, and Edgar his pride beneath an idiot’s rags; Portia wears
the apparel of a lawyer, and Rosalind is attired in ‘all points as a
man’; the cloak-bag of Pisanio changes Imogen to the Youth Fidele;
Jessica flees from her father’s house in boy’s dress, and Julia ties up
her yellow hair in fantastic love-knots, and dons hose and doublet; Henry
the Eighth woos his lady as a shepherd, and Romeo his as a pilgrim;
Prince Hal and Poins appear first as footpads in buckram suits, and then
in white aprons and leather jerkins as the waiters in a tavern: and as
for Falstaff, does he not come on as a highwayman, as an old woman, as
Herne the Hunter, and as the clothes going to the laundry?

Nor are the examples of the employment of costume as a mode of
intensifying dramatic situation less numerous.  After slaughter of
Duncan, Macbeth appears in his night-gown as if aroused from sleep; Timon
ends in rags the play he had begun in splendour; Richard flatters the
London citizens in a suit of mean and shabby armour, and, as soon as he
has stepped in blood to the throne, marches through the streets in crown
and George and Garter; the climax of _The Tempest_ is reached when
Prospero, throwing off his enchanter’s robes, sends Ariel for his hat and
rapier, and reveals himself as the great Italian Duke; the very Ghost in
_Hamlet_ changes his mystical apparel to produce different effects; and
as for Juliet, a modern playwright would probably have laid her out in
her shroud, and made the scene a scene of horror merely, but Shakespeare
arrays her in rich and gorgeous raiment, whose loveliness makes the vault
‘a feasting presence full of light,’ turns the tomb into a bridal
chamber, and gives the cue and motive for Romeo’s speech of the triumph
of Beauty over Death.

Even small details of dress, such as the colour of a major-domo’s
stockings, the pattern on a wife’s handkerchief, the sleeve of a young
soldier, and a fashionable woman’s bonnets, become in Shakespeare’s hands
points of actual dramatic importance, and by some of them the action of
the play in question is conditioned absolutely.  Many other dramatists
have availed themselves of costume as a method of expressing directly to
the audience the character of a person on his entrance, though hardly so
brilliantly as Shakespeare has done in the case of the dandy Parolles,
whose dress, by the way, only an archæologist can understand; the fun of
a master and servant exchanging coats in presence of the audience, of
shipwrecked sailors squabbling over the division of a lot of fine
clothes, and of a tinker dressed up like a duke while he is in his cups,
may be regarded as part of that great career which costume has always
played in comedy from the time of Aristophanes down to Mr. Gilbert; but
nobody from the mere details of apparel and adornment has ever drawn such
irony of contrast, such immediate and tragic effect, such pity and such
pathos, as Shakespeare himself.  Armed cap-à-pie, the dead King stalks on
the battlements of Elsinore because all is not right with Denmark;
Shylock’s Jewish gaberdine is part of the stigma under which that wounded
and embittered nature writhes; Arthur begging for his life can think of
no better plea than the handkerchief he had given Hubert—

and Orlando’s blood-stained napkin strikes the first sombre note in that
exquisite woodland idyll, and shows us the depth of feeling that
underlies Rosalind’s fanciful wit and wilful jesting.

 says Imogen, jesting on the loss of the bracelet which was already on its
way to Rome to rob her of her husband’s faith; the little Prince passing
to the Tower plays with the dagger in his uncle’s girdle; Duncan sends a
ring to Lady Macbeth on the night of his own murder, and the ring of
Portia turns the tragedy of the merchant into a wife’s comedy.  The great
rebel York dies with a paper crown on his head; Hamlet’s black suit is a
kind of colour-motive in the piece, like the mourning of the Chimène in
the _Cid_; and the climax of Antony’s speech is the production of Cæsar’s
cloak:—

The flowers which Ophelia carries with her in her madness are as pathetic
as the violets that blossom on a grave; the effect of Lear’s wandering on
the heath is intensified beyond words by his fantastic attire; and when
Cloten, stung by the taunt of that simile which his sister draws from her
husband’s raiment, arrays himself in that husband’s very garb to work
upon her the deed of shame, we feel that there is nothing in the whole of
modern French realism, nothing even in _Thérèse Raquin_, that masterpiece
of horror, which for terrible and tragic significance can compare with
this strange scene in _Cymbeline_.

In the actual dialogue also some of the most vivid passages are those
suggested by costume.  Rosalind’s

Constance’s

and the quick sharp cry of Elizabeth—

are only a few of the many examples one might quote.  One of the finest
effects I have ever seen on the stage was Salvini, in the last act of
_Lear_, tearing the plume from Kent’s cap and applying it to Cordelia’s
lips when he came to the line,

Mr. Booth, whose Lear had many noble qualities of passion, plucked, I
remember, some fur from his archæologically-incorrect ermine for the same
business; but Salvini’s was the finer effect of the two, as well as the
truer.  And those who saw Mr. Irving in the last act of _Richard the
Third_ have not, I am sure, forgotten how much the agony and terror of
his dream was intensified, by contrast, through the calm and quiet that
preceded it, and the delivery of such lines as

lines which had a double meaning for the audience, remembering the last
words which Richard’s mother called after him as he was marching to
Bosworth:—

As regards the resources which Shakespeare had at his disposal, it is to
be remarked that, while he more than once complains of the smallness of
the stage on which he has to produce big historical plays, and of the
want of scenery which obliges him to cut out many effective open-air
incidents, he always writes as a dramatist who had at his disposal a most
elaborate theatrical wardrobe, and who could rely on the actors taking
pains about their make-up.  Even now it is difficult to produce such a
play as the _Comedy of Errors_; and to the picturesque accident of Miss
Ellen Terry’s brother resembling herself we owe the opportunity of seeing
_Twelfth Night_ adequately performed.  Indeed, to put any play of
Shakespeare’s on the stage, absolutely as he himself wished it to be
done, requires the services of a good property-man, a clever wig-maker, a
costumier with a sense of colour and a knowledge of textures, a master of
the methods of making-up, a fencing-master, a dancing-master, and an
artist to direct personally the whole production.  For he is most careful
to tell us the dress and appearance of each character.  ‘Racine abhorre
la réalité,’ says Auguste Vacquerie somewhere; ‘il ne daigne pas
s’occuper de son costume.  Si l’on s’en rapportait aux indications du
poète, Agamemnon serait vêtu d’un sceptre et Achille d’une épée.’  But
with Shakespeare it is very different.  He gives us directions about the
costumes of Perdita, Florizel, Autolycus, the Witches in _Macbeth_, and
the apothecary in _Romeo and Juliet_, several elaborate descriptions of
his fat knight, and a detailed account of the extraordinary garb in which
Petruchio is to be married.  Rosalind, he tells us, is tall, and is to
carry a spear and a little dagger; Celia is smaller, and is to paint her
face brown so as to look sunburnt.  The children who play at fairies in
Windsor Forest are to be dressed in white and green—a compliment, by the
way, to Queen Elizabeth, whose favourite colours they were—and in white,
with green garlands and gilded vizors, the angels are to come to
Katherine in Kimbolton.  Bottom is in homespun, Lysander is distinguished
from Oberon by his wearing an Athenian dress, and Launce has holes in his
boots.  The Duchess of Gloucester stands in a white sheet with her
husband in mourning beside her.  The motley of the Fool, the scarlet of
the Cardinal, and the French lilies broidered on the English coats, are
all made occasion for jest or taunt in the dialogue.  We know the
patterns on the Dauphin’s armour and the Pucelle’s sword, the crest on
Warwick’s helmet and the colour of Bardolph’s nose.  Portia has golden
hair, Phoebe is black-haired, Orlando has chestnut curls, and Sir Andrew
Aguecheek’s hair hangs like flax on a distaff, and won’t curl at all.
Some of the characters are stout, some lean, some straight, some
hunchbacked, some fair, some dark, and some are to blacken their faces.
Lear has a white beard, Hamlet’s father a grizzled, and Benedick is to
shave his in the course of the play.  Indeed, on the subject of stage
beards Shakespeare is quite elaborate; tells us of the many different
colours in use, and gives a hint to actors always to see that their own
are properly tied on.  There is a dance of reapers in rye-straw hats, and
of rustics in hairy coats like satyrs; a masque of Amazons, a masque of
Russians, and a classical masque; several immortal scenes over a weaver
in an ass’s head, a riot over the colour of a coat which it takes the
Lord Mayor of London to quell, and a scene between an infuriated husband
and his wife’s milliner about the slashing of a sleeve.

As for the metaphors Shakespeare draws from dress, and the aphorisms he
makes on it, his hits at the costume of his age, particularly at the
ridiculous size of the ladies’ bonnets, and the many descriptions of the
_mundus muliebris_, from the long of Autolycus in the _Winter’s Tale_
down to the account of the Duchess of Milan’s gown in _Much Ado About
Nothing_, they are far too numerous to quote; though it may be worth
while to remind people that the whole of the Philosophy of Clothes is to
be found in Lear’s scene with Edgar—a passage which has the advantage of
brevity and style over the grotesque wisdom and somewhat mouthing
metaphysics of _Sartor Resartus_.  But I think that from what I have
already said it is quite clear that Shakespeare was very much interested
in costume.  I do not mean in that shallow sense by which it has been
concluded from his knowledge of deeds and daffodils that he was the
Blackstone and Paxton of the Elizabethan age; but that he saw that
costume could be made at once impressive of a certain effect on the
audience and expressive of certain types of character, and is one of the
essential factors of the means which a true illusionist has at his
disposal.  Indeed to him the deformed figure of Richard was of as much
value as Juliet’s loveliness; he sets the serge of the radical beside the
silks of the lord, and sees the stage effects to be got from each: he has
as much delight in Caliban as he has in Ariel, in rags as he has in cloth
of gold, and recognises the artistic beauty of ugliness.

The difficulty Ducis felt about translating _Othello_ in consequence of
the importance given to such a vulgar thing as a handkerchief, and his
attempt to soften its grossness by making the Moor reiterate ‘Le bandeau!
le bandeau!’ may be taken as an example of the difference between _la
tragédie philosophique_ and the drama of real life; and the introduction
for the first time of the word _mouchoir_ at the Théâtre Français was an
era in that romantic-realistic movement of which Hugo is the father and
M. Zola the _enfant terrible_, just as the classicism of the earlier part
of the century was emphasised by Talma’s refusal to play Greek heroes any
longer in a powdered periwig—one of the many instances, by the way, of
that desire for archæological accuracy in dress which has distinguished
the great actors of our age.

In criticising the importance given to money in _La Comédie Humaine_,
Théophile Gautier says that Balzac may claim to have invented a new hero
in fiction, _le héros métallique_.  Of Shakespeare it may be said he was
the first to see the dramatic value of doublets, and that a climax may
depend on a crinoline.

The burning of the Globe Theatre—an event due, by the way, to the results
of the passion for illusion that distinguished Shakespeare’s
stage-management—has unfortunately robbed us of many important documents;
but in the inventory, still in existence, of the costume-wardrobe of a
London theatre in Shakespeare’s time, there are mentioned particular
costumes for cardinals, shepherds, kings, clowns, friars, and fools;
green coats for Robin Hood’s men, and a green gown for Maid Marian; a
white and gold doublet for Henry the Fifth, and a robe for Longshanks;
besides surplices, copes, damask gowns, gowns of cloth of gold and of
cloth of silver, taffeta gowns, calico gowns, velvet coats, satin coats,
frieze coats, jerkins of yellow leather and of black leather, red suits,
grey suits, French Pierrot suits, a robe ‘for to goo invisibell,’ which
seems inexpensive at £3, 10s., and four incomparable fardingales—all of
which show a desire to give every character an appropriate dress.  There
are also entries of Spanish, Moorish and Danish costumes, of helmets,
lances, painted shields, imperial crowns, and papal tiaras, as well as of
costumes for Turkish Janissaries, Roman Senators, and all the gods and
goddesses of Olympus, which evidence a good deal of archæological
research on the part of the manager of the theatre.  It is true that
there is a mention of a bodice for Eve, but probably the _donnée_ of the
play was after the Fall.

Indeed, anybody who cares to examine the age of Shakespeare will see that
archæology was one of its special characteristics.  After that revival of
the classical forms of architecture which was one of the notes of the
Renaissance, and the printing at Venice and elsewhere of the masterpieces
of Greek and Latin literature, had come naturally an interest in the
ornamentation and costume of the antique world.  Nor was it for the
learning that they could acquire, but rather for the loveliness that they
might create, that the artists studied these things.  The curious objects
that were being constantly brought to light by excavations were not left
to moulder in a museum, for the contemplation of a callous curator, and
the _ennui_ of a policeman bored by the absence of crime.  They were used
as motives for the production of a new art, which was to be not beautiful
merely, but also strange.

Infessura tells us that in 1485 some workmen digging on the Appian Way
came across an old Roman sarcophagus inscribed with the name ‘Julia,
daughter of Claudius.’  On opening the coffer they found within its
marble womb the body of a beautiful girl of about fifteen years of age,
preserved by the embalmer’s skill from corruption and the decay of time.
Her eyes were half open, her hair rippled round her in crisp curling
gold, and from her lips and cheek the bloom of maidenhood had not yet
departed.  Borne back to the Capitol, she became at once the centre of a
new cult, and from all parts of the city crowded pilgrims to worship at
the wonderful shrine, till the Pope, fearing lest those who had found the
secret of beauty in a Pagan tomb might forget what secrets Judæa’s rough
and rock-hewn sepulchre contained, had the body conveyed away by night,
and in secret buried.  Legend though it may be, yet the story is none the
less valuable as showing us the attitude of the Renaissance towards the
antique world.  Archæology to them was not a mere science for the
antiquarian; it was a means by which they could touch the dry dust of
antiquity into the very breath and beauty of life, and fill with the new
wine of romanticism forms that else had been old and outworn.  From the
pulpit of Niccola Pisano down to Mantegna’s ‘Triumph of Cæsar,’ and the
service Cellini designed for King Francis, the influence of this spirit
can be traced; nor was it confined merely to the immobile arts—the arts
of arrested movement—but its influence was to be seen also in the great
Græco-Roman masques which were the constant amusement of the gay courts
of the time, and in the public pomps and processions with which the
citizens of big commercial towns were wont to greet the princes that
chanced to visit them; pageants, by the way, which were considered so
important that large prints were made of them and published—a fact which
is a proof of the general interest at the time in matters of such kind.

And this use of archæology in shows, so far from being a bit of priggish
pedantry, is in every way legitimate and beautiful.  For the stage is not
merely the meeting-place of all the arts, but is also the return of art
to life.  Sometimes in an archæological novel the use of strange and
obsolete terms seems to hide the reality beneath the learning, and I dare
say that many of the readers of _Notre Dame de Paris_ have been much
puzzled over the meaning of such expressions as _la casaque à mahoitres_,
_les voulgiers_, _le gallimard taché d’encre_, _les craaquiniers_, and
the like; but with the stage how different it is!  The ancient world
wakes from its sleep, and history moves as a pageant before our eyes,
without obliging us to have recourse to a dictionary or an encyclopædia
for the perfection of our enjoyment.  Indeed, there is not the slightest
necessity that the public should know the authorities for the mounting of
any piece.  From such materials, for instance, as the disk of Theodosius,
materials with which the majority of people are probably not very
familiar, Mr. E. W. Godwin, one of the most artistic spirits of this
century in England, created the marvellous loveliness of the first act of
_Claudian_, and showed us the life of Byzantium in the fourth century,
not by a dreary lecture and a set of grimy casts, not by a novel which
requires a glossary to explain it, but by the visible presentation before
us of all the glory of that great town.  And while the costumes were true
to the smallest points of colour and design, yet the details were not
assigned that abnormal importance which they must necessarily be given in
a piecemeal lecture, but were subordinated to the rules of lofty
composition and the unity of artistic effect.  Mr. Symonds, speaking of
that great picture of Mantegna’s, now in Hampton Court, says that the
artist has converted an antiquarian motive into a theme for melodies of
line.  The same could have been said with equal justice of Mr. Godwin’s
scene.  Only the foolish called it pedantry, only those who would neither
look nor listen spoke of the passion of the play being killed by its
paint.  It was in reality a scene not merely perfect in its
picturesqueness, but absolutely dramatic also, getting rid of any
necessity for tedious descriptions, and showing us, by the colour and
character of Claudian’s dress, and the dress of his attendants, the whole
nature and life of the man, from what school of philosophy he affected,
down to what horses he backed on the turf.

And indeed archæology is only really delightful when transfused into some
form of art.  I have no desire to underrate the services of laborious
scholars, but I feel that the use Keats made of Lemprière’s Dictionary is
of far more value to us than Professor Max Müller’s treatment of the same
mythology as a disease of language.  Better _Endymion_ than any theory,
however sound, or, as in the present instance, unsound, of an epidemic
among adjectives!  And who does not feel that the chief glory of
Piranesi’s book on Vases is that it gave Keats the suggestion for his
‘Ode on a Grecian Urn’?  Art, and art only, can make archæology
beautiful; and the theatric art can use it most directly and most
vividly, for it can combine in one exquisite presentation the illusion of
actual life with the wonder of the unreal world.  But the sixteenth
century was not merely the age of Vitruvius; it was the age of Vecellio
also.  Every nation seems suddenly to have become interested in the dress
of its neighbours.  Europe began to investigate its own clothes, and the
amount of books published on national costumes is quite extraordinary.
At the beginning of the century the _Nuremberg Chronicle_, with its two
thousand illustrations, reached its fifth edition, and before the century
was over seventeen editions were published of Munster’s _Cosmography_.
Besides these two books there were also the works of Michael Colyns, of
Hans Weigel, of Amman, and of Vecellio himself, all of them well
illustrated, some of the drawings in Vecellio being probably from the
hand of Titian.

Nor was it merely from books and treatises that they acquired their
knowledge.  The development of the habit of foreign travel, the increased
commercial intercourse between countries, and the frequency of diplomatic
missions, gave every nation many opportunities of studying the various
forms of contemporary dress.  After the departure from England, for
instance, of the ambassadors from the Czar, the Sultan and the Prince of
Morocco, Henry the Eighth and his friends gave several masques in the
strange attire of their visitors.  Later on London saw, perhaps too
often, the sombre splendour of the Spanish Court, and to Elizabeth came
envoys from all lands, whose dress, Shakespeare tells us, had an
important influence on English costume.

And the interest was not confined merely to classical dress, or the dress
of foreign nations; there was also a good deal of research, amongst
theatrical people especially, into the ancient costume of England itself:
and when Shakespeare, in the prologue to one of his plays, expresses his
regret at being unable to produce helmets of the period, he is speaking
as an Elizabethan manager and not merely as an Elizabethan poet.  At
Cambridge, for instance, during his day, a play of _Richard The Third_
was performed, in which the actors were attired in real dresses of the
time, procured from the great collection of historical costume in the
Tower, which was always open to the inspection of managers, and sometimes
placed at their disposal.  And I cannot help thinking that this
performance must have been far more artistic, as regards costume, than
Garrick’s mounting of Shakespeare’s own play on the subject, in which he
himself appeared in a nondescript fancy dress, and everybody else in the
costume of the time of George the Third, Richmond especially being much
admired in the uniform of a young guardsman.

For what is the use to the stage of that archæology which has so
strangely terrified the critics, but that it, and it alone, can give us
the architecture and apparel suitable to the time in which the action of
the play passes?  It enables us to see a Greek dressed like a Greek, and
an Italian like an Italian; to enjoy the arcades of Venice and the
balconies of Verona; and, if the play deals with any of the great eras in
our country’s history, to contemplate the age in its proper attire, and
the king in his habit as he lived.  And I wonder, by the way, what Lord
Lytton would have said some time ago, at the Princess’s Theatre, had the
curtain risen on his father’s Brutus reclining in a Queen Anne chair,
attired in a flowing wig and a flowered dressing-gown, a costume which in
the last century was considered peculiarly appropriate to an antique
Roman!  For in those halcyon days of the drama no archæology troubled the
stage, or distressed the critics, and our inartistic grandfathers sat
peaceably in a stifling atmosphere of anachronisms, and beheld with the
calm complacency of the age of prose an Iachimo in powder and patches, a
Lear in lace ruffles, and a Lady Macbeth in a large crinoline.  I can
understand archæology being attacked on the ground of its excessive
realism, but to attack it as pedantic seems to be very much beside the
mark.  However, to attack it for any reason is foolish; one might just as
well speak disrespectfully of the equator.  For archæology, being a
science, is neither good nor bad, but a fact simply.  Its value depends
entirely on how it is used, and only an artist can use it.  We look to
the archæologist for the materials, to the artist for the method.

In designing the scenery and costumes for any of Shakespeare’s plays, the
first thing the artist has to settle is the best date for the drama.
This should be determined by the general spirit of the play, more than by
any actual historical references which may occur in it.  Most _Hamlets_ I
have seen were placed far too early.  _Hamlet_ is essentially a scholar
of the Revival of Learning; and if the allusion to the recent invasion of
England by the Danes puts it back to the ninth century, the use of foils
brings it down much later.  Once, however, that the date has been fixed,
then the archæologist is to supply us with the facts which the artist is
to convert into effects.

It has been said that the anachronisms in the plays themselves show us
that Shakespeare was indifferent to historical accuracy, and a great deal
of capital has been made out of Hector’s indiscreet quotation from
Aristotle.  Upon the other hand, the anachronisms are really few in
number, and not very important, and, had Shakespeare’s attention been
drawn to them by a brother artist, he would probably have corrected them.
For, though they can hardly be called blemishes, they are certainly not
the great beauties of his work; or, at least, if they are, their
anachronistic charm cannot be emphasised unless the play is accurately
mounted according to its proper date.  In looking at Shakespeare’s plays
as a whole, however, what is really remarkable is their extraordinary
fidelity as regards his personages and his plots.  Many of his _dramatis
personæ_ are people who had actually existed, and some of them might have
been seen in real life by a portion of his audience.  Indeed the most
violent attack that was made on Shakespeare in his time was for his
supposed caricature of Lord Cobham.  As for his plots, Shakespeare
constantly draws them either from authentic history, or from the old
ballads and traditions which served as history to the Elizabethan public,
and which even now no scientific historian would dismiss as absolutely
untrue.  And not merely did he select fact instead of fancy as the basis
of much of his imaginative work, but he always gives to each play the
general character, the social atmosphere in a word, of the age in
question.  Stupidity he recognises as being one of the permanent
characteristics of all European civilisations; so he sees no difference
between a London mob of his own day and a Roman mob of pagan days,
between a silly watchman in Messina and a silly Justice of the Peace in
Windsor.  But when he deals with higher characters, with those exceptions
of each age which are so fine that they become its types, he gives them
absolutely the stamp and seal of their time.  Virgilia is one of those
Roman wives on whose tomb was written ‘Domi mansit, lanam fecit,’ as
surely as Juliet is the romantic girl of the Renaissance.  He is even
true to the characteristics of race.  Hamlet has all the imagination and
irresolution of the Northern nations, and the Princess Katharine is as
entirely French as the heroine of _Divorçons_.  Harry the Fifth is a pure
Englishman, and Othello a true Moor.

Again when Shakespeare treats of the history of England from the
fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries, it is wonderful how careful he is
to have his facts perfectly right—indeed he follows Holinshed with
curious fidelity.  The incessant wars between France and England are
described with extraordinary accuracy down to the names of the besieged
towns, the ports of landing and embarkation, the sites and dates of the
battles, the titles of the commanders on each side, and the lists of the
killed and wounded.  And as regards the Civil Wars of the Roses we have
many elaborate genealogies of the seven sons of Edward the Third; the
claims of the rival Houses of York and Lancaster to the throne are
discussed at length; and if the English aristocracy will not read
Shakespeare as a poet, they should certainly read him as a sort of early
Peerage.  There is hardly a single title in the Upper House, with the
exception of course of the uninteresting titles assumed by the law lords,
which does not appear in Shakespeare along with many details of family
history, creditable and discreditable.  Indeed if it be really necessary
that the School Board children should know all about the Wars of the
Roses, they could learn their lessons just as well out of Shakespeare as
out of shilling primers, and learn them, I need not say, far more
pleasurably.  Even in Shakespeare’s own day this use of his plays was
recognised.  ‘The historical plays teach history to those who cannot read
it in the chronicles,’ says Heywood in a tract about the stage, and yet I
am sure that sixteenth-century chronicles were much more delightful
reading than nineteenth-century primers are.

Of course the æsthetic value of Shakespeare’s plays does not, in the
slightest degree, depend on their facts, but on their Truth, and Truth is
independent of facts always, inventing or selecting them at pleasure.
But still Shakespeare’s use of facts is a most interesting part of his
method of work, and shows us his attitude towards the stage, and his
relations to the great art of illusion.  Indeed he would have been very
much surprised at any one classing his plays with ‘fairy tales,’ as Lord
Lytton does; for one of his aims was to create for England a national
historical drama, which should deal with incidents with which the public
was well acquainted, and with heroes that lived in the memory of a
people.  Patriotism, I need hardly say, is not a necessary quality of
art; but it means, for the artist, the substitution of a universal for an
individual feeling, and for the public the presentation of a work of art
in a most attractive and popular form.  It is worth noticing that
Shakespeare’s first and last successes were both historical plays.

It may be asked, what has this to do with Shakespeare’s attitude towards
costume?  I answer that a dramatist who laid such stress on historical
accuracy of fact would have welcomed historical accuracy of costume as a
most important adjunct to his illusionist method.  And I have no
hesitation in saying that he did so.  The reference to helmets of the
period in the prologue to _Henry the Fifth_ may be considered fanciful,
though Shakespeare must have often seen

where it still hangs in the dusky gloom of Westminster Abbey, along with
the saddle of that ‘imp of fame,’ and the dinted shield with its torn
blue velvet lining and its tarnished lilies of gold; but the use of
military tabards in _Henry the Sixth_ is a bit of pure archæology, as
they were not worn in the sixteenth century; and the King’s own tabard, I
may mention, was still suspended over his tomb in St. George’s Chapel,
Windsor, in Shakespeare’s day.  For, up to the time of the unfortunate
triumph of the Philistines in 1645, the chapels and cathedrals of England
were the great national museums of archæology, and in them were kept the
armour and attire of the heroes of English history.  A good deal was of
course preserved in the Tower, and even in Elizabeth’s day tourists were
brought there to see such curious relics of the past as Charles Brandon’s
huge lance, which is still, I believe, the admiration of our country
visitors; but the cathedrals and churches were, as a rule, selected as
the most suitable shrines for the reception of the historic antiquities.
Canterbury can still show us the helm of the Black Prince, Westminster
the robes of our kings, and in old St. Paul’s the very banner that had
waved on Bosworth field was hung up by Richmond himself.

In fact, everywhere that Shakespeare turned in London, he saw the apparel
and appurtenances of past ages, and it is impossible to doubt that he
made use of his opportunities.  The employment of lance and shield, for
instance, in actual warfare, which is so frequent in his plays, is drawn
from archæology, and not from the military accoutrements of his day; and
his general use of armour in battle was not a characteristic of his age,
a time when it was rapidly disappearing before firearms.  Again, the
crest on Warwick’s helmet, of which such a point is made in _Henry the
Sixth_, is absolutely correct in a fifteenth-century play when crests
were generally worn, but would not have been so in a play of
Shakespeare’s own time, when feathers and plumes had taken their place—a
fashion which, as he tells us in _Henry the Eighth_, was borrowed from
France.  For the historical plays, then, we may be sure that archæology
was employed, and as for the others I feel certain that it was the case
also.  The appearance of Jupiter on his eagle, thunderbolt in hand, of
Juno with her peacocks, and of Iris with her many-coloured bow; the
Amazon masque and the masque of the Five Worthies, may all be regarded as
archæological; and the vision which Posthumus sees in prison of Sicilius
Leonatus—‘an old man, attired like a warrior, leading an ancient
matron’—is clearly so.  Of the ‘Athenian dress’ by which Lysander is
distinguished from Oberon I have already spoken; but one of the most
marked instances is in the case of the dress of Coriolanus, for which
Shakespeare goes directly to Plutarch.  That historian, in his Life of
the great Roman, tells us of the oak-wreath with which Caius Marcius was
crowned, and of the curious kind of dress in which, according to ancient
fashion, he had to canvass his electors; and on both of these points he
enters into long disquisitions, investigating the origin and meaning of
the old customs.  Shakespeare, in the spirit of the true artist, accepts
the facts of the antiquarian and converts them into dramatic and
picturesque effects: indeed the gown of humility, the ‘woolvish gown,’ as
Shakespeare calls it, is the central note of the play.  There are other
cases I might quote, but this one is quite sufficient for my purpose; and
it is evident from it at any rate that, in mounting a play in the
accurate costume of the time, according to the best authorities, we are
carrying out Shakespeare’s own wishes and method.

Even if it were not so, there is no more reason that we should continue
any imperfections which may be supposed to have characterised
Shakespeare’s stage mounting than that we should have Juliet played by a
young man, or give up the advantage of changeable scenery.  A great work
of dramatic art should not merely be made expressive of modern passion by
means of the actor, but should be presented to us in the form most
suitable to the modern spirit.  Racine produced his Roman plays in Louis
Quatorze dress on a stage crowded with spectators; but we require
different conditions for the enjoyment of his art.  Perfect accuracy of
detail, for the sake of perfect illusion, is necessary for us.  What we
have to see is that the details are not allowed to usurp the principal
place.  They must be subordinate always to the general motive of the
play.  But subordination in art does not mean disregard of truth; it
means conversion of fact into effect, and assigning to each detail its
proper relative value

This passage is interesting as coming from the first great French
dramatist who employed archæology on the stage, and whose plays, though
absolutely correct in detail, are known to all for their passion, not for
their pedantry—for their life, not for their learning.  It is true that
he has made certain concessions in the case of the employment of curious
or strange expressions.  Ruy Blas talks of M, de Priego as ‘sujet du roi’
instead of ‘noble du roi,’ and Angelo Malipieri speaks of ‘la croix
rouge’ instead of ‘la croix de gueules.’  But they are concessions made
to the public, or rather to a section of it.  ‘J’en offre ici toute mes
excuses aux spectateurs intelligents,’ he says in a note to one of the
plays; ‘espérons qu’un jour un seigneur vénitien pourra dire tout
bonnement sans péril son blason sur le théâtre.  C’est un progrès qui
viendra.’  And, though the description of the crest is not couched in
accurate language, still the crest itself was accurately right.  It may,
of course, be said that the public do not notice these things; upon the
other hand, it should be remembered that Art has no other aim but her own
perfection, and proceeds simply by her own laws, and that the play which
Hamlet describes as being caviare to the general is a play he highly
praises.  Besides, in England, at any rate, the public have undergone a
transformation; there is far more appreciation of beauty now than there
was a few years ago; and though they may not be familiar with the
authorities and archæological data for what is shown to them, still they
enjoy whatever loveliness they look at.  And this is the important thing.
Better to take pleasure in a rose than to put its root under a
microscope.  Archæological accuracy is merely a condition of illusionist
stage effect; it is not its quality.  And Lord Lytton’s proposal that the
dresses should merely be beautiful without being accurate is founded on a
misapprehension of the nature of costume, and of its value on the stage.
This value is twofold, picturesque and dramatic; the former depends on
the colour of the dress, the latter on its design and character.  But so
interwoven are the two that, whenever in our own day historical accuracy
has been disregarded, and the various dresses in a play taken from
different ages, the result has been that the stage has been turned into
that chaos of costume, that caricature of the centuries, the Fancy Dress
Ball, to the entire ruin of all dramatic and picturesque effect.  For the
dresses of one age do not artistically harmonise with the dresses of
another: and, as far as dramatic value goes, to confuse the costumes is
to confuse the play.  Costume is a growth, an evolution, and a most
important, perhaps the most important, sign of the manners, customs and
mode of life of each century.  The Puritan dislike of colour, adornment
and grace in apparel was part of the great revolt of the middle classes
against Beauty in the seventeenth century.  A historian who disregarded
it would give us a most inaccurate picture of the time, and a dramatist
who did not avail himself of it would miss a most vital element in
producing an illusionist effect.  The effeminacy of dress that
characterised the reign of Richard the Second was a constant theme of
contemporary authors.  Shakespeare, writing two hundred years after,
makes the king’s fondness for gay apparel and foreign fashions a point in
the play, from John of Gaunt’s reproaches down to Richard’s own speech in
the third act on his deposition from the throne.  And that Shakespeare
examined Richard’s tomb in Westminster Abbey seems to me certain from
York’s speech:—


For we can still discern on the King’s robe his favourite badge—the sun
issuing from a cloud.  In fact, in every age the social conditions are so
exemplified in costume, that to produce a sixteenth-century play in
fourteenth-century attire, or _vice versa_, would make the performance
seem unreal because untrue.  And, valuable as beauty of effect on the
stage is, the highest beauty is not merely comparable with absolute
accuracy of detail, but really dependent on it.  To invent, an entirely
new costume is almost impossible except in burlesque or extravaganza, and
as for combining the dress of different centuries into one, the
experiment would be dangerous, and Shakespeare’s opinion of the artistic
value of such a medley may be gathered from his incessant satire of the
Elizabethan dandies for imagining that they were well dressed because
they got their doublets in Italy, their hats in Germany, and their hose
in France.  And it should be noted that the most lovely scenes that have
been produced on our stage have been those that have been characterised
by perfect accuracy, such as Mr. and Mrs. Bancroft’s eighteenth-century
revivals at the Haymarket, Mr. Irying’s superb production of _Much Ado
About Nothing_, and Mr. Barrett’s _Claudian_.  Besides, and this is
perhaps the most complete answer to Lord Lytton’s theory, it must be
remembered that neither in costume nor in dialogue is beauty the
dramatist’s primary aim at all.  The true dramatist aims first at what is
characteristic, and no more desires that all his personages should be
beautifully attired than he desires that they should all have beautiful
natures or speak beautiful English.  The true dramatist, in fact, shows
us life under the conditions of art, not art in the form of life.  The
Greek dress was the loveliest dress the world has ever seen, and the
English dress of the last century one of the most monstrous; yet we
cannot costume a play by Sheridan as we would costume a play by
Sophokles.  For, as Polonius says in his excellent lecture, a lecture to
which I am glad to have the opportunity of expressing my obligations, one
of the first qualities of apparel is its expressiveness.  And the
affected style of dress in the last century was the natural
characteristic of a society of affected manners and affected
conversation—a characteristic which the realistic dramatist will highly
value down to the smallest detail of accuracy, and the materials for
which he can get only from archæology.

But it is not enough that a dress should be accurate; it must be also
appropriate to the stature and appearance of the actor, and to his
supposed condition, as well as to his necessary action in the play.  In
Mr. Hare’s production of _As You Like It_ at the St. James’s Theatre, for
instance, the whole point of Orlando’s complaint that he is brought up
like a peasant, and not like a gentleman, was spoiled by the gorgeousness
of his dress, and the splendid apparel worn by the banished Duke and his
friends was quite out of place.  Mr. Lewis Wingfield’s explanation that
the sumptuary laws of the period necessitated their doing so, is, I am
afraid, hardly sufficient.  Outlaws, lurking in a forest and living by
the chase, are not very likely to care much about ordinances of dress.
They were probably attired like Robin Hood’s men, to whom, indeed, they
are compared in the course of the play.  And that their dress was not
that of wealthy noblemen may be seen by Orlando’s words when he breaks in
upon them.  He mistakes them for robbers, and is amazed to find that they
answer him in courteous and gentle terms.  Lady Archibald Campbell’s
production, under Mr. E. W. Godwin’s direction, of the same play in
Coombe Wood was, as regards mounting, far more artistic.  At least it
seemed so to me.  The Duke and his companions were dressed in serge
tunics, leathern jerkins, high boots and gauntlets, and wore bycocket
hats and hoods.  And as they were playing in a real forest, they found, I
am sure, their dresses extremely convenient.  To every character in the
play was given a perfectly appropriate attire, and the brown and green of
their costumes harmonised exquisitely with the ferns through which they
wandered, the trees beneath which they lay, and the lovely English
landscape that surrounded the Pastoral Players.  The perfect naturalness
of the scene was due to the absolute accuracy and appropriateness of
everything that was worn.  Nor could archæology have been put to a
severer test, or come out of it more triumphantly.  The whole production
showed once for all that, unless a dress is archæologically correct, and
artistically appropriate, it always looks unreal, unnatural, and
theatrical in the sense of artificial.

Nor, again, is it enough that there should be accurate and appropriate
costumes of beautiful colours; there must be also beauty of colour on the
stage as a whole, and as long as the background is painted by one artist,
and the foreground figures independently designed by another, there is
the danger of a want of harmony in the scene as a picture.  For each
scene the colour-scheme should be settled as absolutely as for the
decoration of a room, and the textures which it is proposed to use should
be mixed and re-mixed in every possible combination, and what is
discordant removed.  Then, as regards the particular kinds of colours,
the stage is often too glaring, partly through the excessive use of hot,
violent reds, and partly through the costumes looking too new.
Shabbiness, which in modern life is merely the tendency of the lower
orders towards tone, is not without its artistic value, and modern
colours are often much improved by being a little faded.  Blue also is
too frequently used: it is not merely a dangerous colour to wear by
gaslight, but it is really difficult in England to get a thoroughly good
blue.  The fine Chinese blue, which we all so much admire, takes two
years to dye, and the English public will not wait so long for a colour.
Peacock blue, of course, has been employed on the stage, notably at the
Lyceum, with great advantage; but all attempts at a good light blue, or
good dark blue, which I have seen have been failures.  The value of black
is hardly appreciated; it was used effectively by Mr. Irving in _Hamlet_
as the central note of a composition, but as a tone-giving neutral its
importance is not recognised.  And this is curious, considering the
general colour of the dress of a century in which, as Baudelaire says,
‘Nous célébrons tous quelque enterrement.’  The archæologist of the
future will probably point to this age as the time when the beauty of
black was understood; but I hardly think that, as regards stage-mounting
or house decoration, it really is.  Its decorative value is, of course,
the same as that of white or gold; it can separate and harmonise colours.
In modern plays the black frock-coat of the hero becomes important in
itself, and should be given a suitable background.  But it rarely is.
Indeed the only good background for a play in modern dress which I have
ever seen was the dark grey and cream-white scene of the first act of the
_Princesse Georges_ in Mrs. Langtry’s production.  As a rule, the hero is
smothered in _bric-à-brac_ and palm-trees, lost in the gilded abyss of
Louis Quatorze furniture, or reduced to a mere midge in the midst of
marqueterie; whereas the background should always be kept as a
background, and colour subordinated to effect.  This, of course, can only
be done when there is one single mind directing the whole production.
The facts of art are diverse, but the essence of artistic effect is
unity.  Monarchy, Anarchy, and Republicanism may contend for the
government of nations; but a theatre should be in the power of a cultured
despot.  There may be division of labour, but there must be no division
of mind.  Whoever understands the costume of an age understands of
necessity its architecture and its surroundings also, and it is easy to
see from the chairs of a century whether it was a century of crinolines
or not.  In fact, in art there is no specialism, and a really artistic
production should bear the impress of one master, and one master only,
who not merely should design and arrange everything, but should have
complete control over the way in which each dress is to be worn.

Mademoiselle Mars, in the first production of _Hernani_, absolutely
refused to call her lover ‘_Mon Lion_!’ unless she was allowed to wear a
little fashionable _toque_ then much in vogue on the Boulevards; and many
young ladies on our own stage insist to the present day on wearing stiff
starched petticoats under Greek dresses, to the entire ruin of all
delicacy of line and fold; but these wicked things should not be allowed.
And there should be far more dress rehearsals than there are now.  Actors
such as Mr. Forbes-Robertson, Mr. Conway, Mr. George Alexander, and
others, not to mention older artists, can move with ease and elegance in
the attire of any century; but there are not a few who seem dreadfully
embarrassed about their hands if they have no side pockets, and who
always wear their dresses as if they were costumes.  Costumes, of course,
they are to the designer; but dresses they should be to those that wear
them.  And it is time that a stop should be put to the idea, very
prevalent on the stage, that the Greeks and Romans always went about
bareheaded in the open air—a mistake the Elizabethan managers did not
fall into, for they gave hoods as well as gowns to their Roman senators.

More dress rehearsals would also be of value in explaining to the actors
that there is a form of gesture and movement that is not merely
appropriate to each style of dress, but really conditioned by it.  The
extravagant use of the arms in the eighteenth century, for instance, was
the necessary result of the large hoop, and the solemn dignity of
Burleigh owed as much to his ruff as to his reason.  Besides until an
actor is at home in his dress, he is not at home in his part.

Of the value of beautiful costume in creating an artistic temperament in
the audience, and producing that joy in beauty for beauty’s sake without
which the great masterpieces of art can never be understood, I will not
here speak; though it is worth while to notice how Shakespeare
appreciated that side of the question in the production of his tragedies,
acting them always by artificial light, and in a theatre hung with black;
but what I have tried to point out is that archæology is not a pedantic
method, but a method of artistic illusion, and that costume is a means of
displaying character without description, and of producing dramatic
situations and dramatic effects.  And I think it is a pity that so many
critics should have set themselves to attack one of the most important
movements on the modern stage before that movement has at all reached its
proper perfection.  That it will do so, however, I feel as certain as
that we shall require from our dramatic critics in the future higher
qualification than that they can remember Macready or have seen Benjamin
Webster; we shall require of them, indeed, that they cultivate a sense of
beauty.  _Pour être plus difficile_, _la tâche n’en est que plus
glorieuse_.  And if they will not encourage, at least they must not
oppose, a movement of which Shakespeare of all dramatists would have most
approved, for it has the illusion of truth for its method, and the
illusion of beauty for its result.  Not that I agree with everything that
I have said in this essay.  There is much with which I entirely disagree.
The essay simply represents an artistic standpoint, and in æsthetic
criticism attitude is everything.  For in art there is no such thing as a
universal truth.  A Truth in art is that whose contradictory is also
true.  And just as it is only in art-criticism, and through it, that we
can apprehend the Platonic theory of ideas, so it is only in
art-criticism, and through it, that we can realise Hegel’s system of
contraries.  The truths of metaphysics are the truths of masks.

HÉLAS!


   TO _drift with every passion till my soul_
   _Is a stringed lute on which all winds can play_,
   _Is it for this that I have given away_
   _Mine ancient wisdom, and austere control_?
   _Methinks my life is a twice-written scroll_
   _Scrawled over on some boyish holiday_
   _With idle songs for pipe and virelay_,
   _Which do but mar the secret of the whole_.
   _Surely there was a time I might have trod_
   _The sunlit heights, and from life’s dissonance_
   _Struck one clear chord to reach the ears of God_:
   _Is that time dead_? _lo_! _with a little rod_
   _I did but touch the honey of romance_—
   _And must I lose a soul’s inheritance_?



ELEUTHERIA


SONNET TO LIBERTY


   NOT that I love thy children, whose dull eyes
   See nothing save their own unlovely woe,
   Whose minds know nothing, nothing care to know,—
   But that the roar of thy Democracies,
   Thy reigns of Terror, thy great Anarchies,
   Mirror my wildest passions like the sea
   And give my rage a brother—!  Liberty!
   For this sake only do thy dissonant cries
   Delight my discreet soul, else might all kings
   By bloody knout or treacherous cannonades
   Rob nations of their rights inviolate
   And I remain unmoved—and yet, and yet,
   These Christs that die upon the barricades,
   God knows it I am with them, in some things.


AVE IMPERATRIX


   SET in this stormy Northern sea,
      Queen of these restless fields of tide,
   England! what shall men say of thee,
      Before whose feet the worlds divide?

   The earth, a brittle globe of glass,
      Lies in the hollow of thy hand,
   And through its heart of crystal pass,
      Like shadows through a twilight land,

   The spears of crimson-suited war,
      The long white-crested waves of fight,
   And all the deadly fires which are
      The torches of the lords of Night.

   The yellow leopards, strained and lean,
      The treacherous Russian knows so well,
   With gaping blackened jaws are seen
      Leap through the hail of screaming shell.

   The strong sea-lion of England’s wars
      Hath left his sapphire cave of sea,
   To battle with the storm that mars
      The stars of England’s chivalry.

   The brazen-throated clarion blows
      Across the Pathan’s reedy fen,
   And the high steeps of Indian snows
      Shake to the tread of armèd men.

   And many an Afghan chief, who lies
      Beneath his cool pomegranate-trees,
   Clutches his sword in fierce surmise
      When on the mountain-side he sees

   The fleet-foot Marri scout, who comes
      To tell how he hath heard afar
   The measured roll of English drums
      Beat at the gates of Kandahar.

   For southern wind and east wind meet
      Where, girt and crowned by sword and fire,
   England with bare and bloody feet
      Climbs the steep road of wide empire.

   O lonely Himalayan height,
      Grey pillar of the Indian sky,
   Where saw’st thou last in clanging flight
      Our wingèd dogs of Victory?

   The almond-groves of Samarcand,
      Bokhara, where red lilies blow,
   And Oxus, by whose yellow sand
      The grave white-turbaned merchants go:

   And on from thence to Ispahan,
      The gilded garden of the sun,
   Whence the long dusty caravan
      Brings cedar wood and vermilion;

   And that dread city of Cabool
      Set at the mountain’s scarpèd feet,
   Whose marble tanks are ever full
      With water for the noonday heat:

   Where through the narrow straight Bazaar
      A little maid Circassian
   Is led, a present from the Czar
      Unto some old and bearded khan,—

   Here have our wild war-eagles flown,
      And flapped wide wings in fiery fight;
   But the sad dove, that sits alone
      In England—she hath no delight.

   In vain the laughing girl will lean
      To greet her love with love-lit eyes:
   Down in some treacherous black ravine,
      Clutching his flag, the dead boy lies.

   And many a moon and sun will see
      The lingering wistful children wait
   To climb upon their father’s knee;
      And in each house made desolate

   Pale women who have lost their lord
      Will kiss the relics of the slain—
   Some tarnished epaulette—some sword—
      Poor toys to soothe such anguished pain.

   For not in quiet English fields
      Are these, our brothers, lain to rest,
   Where we might deck their broken shields
      With all the flowers the dead love best.

   For some are by the Delhi walls,
      And many in the Afghan land,
   And many where the Ganges falls
      Through seven mouths of shifting sand.

   And some in Russian waters lie,
      And others in the seas which are
   The portals to the East, or by
      The wind-swept heights of Trafalgar.

   O wandering graves!  O restless sleep!
      O silence of the sunless day!
   O still ravine!  O stormy deep!
      Give up your prey!  Give up your prey!

   And thou whose wounds are never healed,
      Whose weary race is never won,
   O Cromwell’s England! must thou yield
      For every inch of ground a son?

   Go! crown with thorns thy gold-crowned head,
      Change thy glad song to song of pain;
   Wind and wild wave have got thy dead,
      And will not yield them back again.

   Wave and wild wind and foreign shore
      Possess the flower of English land—
   Lips that thy lips shall kiss no more,
      Hands that shall never clasp thy hand.

   What profit now that we have bound
      The whole round world with nets of gold,
   If hidden in our heart is found
      The care that groweth never old?

   What profit that our galleys ride,
      Pine-forest-like, on every main?
   Ruin and wreck are at our side,
      Grim warders of the House of Pain.

   Where are the brave, the strong, the fleet?
      Where is our English chivalry?
   Wild grasses are their burial-sheet,
      And sobbing waves their threnody.

   O loved ones lying far away,
      What word of love can dead lips send!
   O wasted dust!  O senseless clay!
      Is this the end! is this the end!

   Peace, peace! we wrong the noble dead
      To vex their solemn slumber so;
   Though childless, and with thorn-crowned head,
      Up the steep road must England go,

   Yet when this fiery web is spun,
      Her watchmen shall descry from far
   The young Republic like a sun
      Rise from these crimson seas of war.


TO MILTON


   MILTON!  I think thy spirit hath passed away
   From these white cliffs and high-embattled towers;
      This gorgeous fiery-coloured world of ours
   Seems fallen into ashes dull and grey,
   And the age changed unto a mimic play
      Wherein we waste our else too-crowded hours:
      For all our pomp and pageantry and powers
   We are but fit to delve the common clay,
   Seeing this little isle on which we stand,
      This England, this sea-lion of the sea,
      By ignorant demagogues is held in fee,
   Who love her not: Dear God! is this the land
      Which bare a triple empire in her hand
      When Cromwell spake the word Democracy!


LOUIS NAPOLEON


   EAGLE of Austerlitz! where were thy wings
      When far away upon a barbarous strand,
      In fight unequal, by an obscure hand,
   Fell the last scion of thy brood of Kings!

   Poor boy! thou shalt not flaunt thy cloak of red,
      Or ride in state through Paris in the van
      Of thy returning legions, but instead
   Thy mother France, free and republican,

   Shall on thy dead and crownless forehead place
      The better laurels of a soldier’s crown,
      That not dishonoured should thy soul go down
   To tell the mighty Sire of thy race

   That France hath kissed the mouth of Liberty,
      And found it sweeter than his honied bees,
      And that the giant wave Democracy
   Breaks on the shores where Kings lay couched at ease.


SONNET


              ON THE MASSACRE OF THE CHRISTIANS IN BULGARIA

   CHRIST, dost Thou live indeed? or are Thy bones
   Still straitened in their rock-hewn sepulchre?
   And was Thy Rising only dreamed by her
   Whose love of Thee for all her sin atones?
   For here the air is horrid with men’s groans,
   The priests who call upon Thy name are slain,
   Dost Thou not hear the bitter wail of pain
   From those whose children lie upon the stones?
   Come down, O Son of God! incestuous gloom
   Curtains the land, and through the starless night
   Over Thy Cross a Crescent moon I see!
   If Thou in very truth didst burst the tomb
   Come down, O Son of Man! and show Thy might
   Lest Mahomet be crowned instead of Thee!


QUANTUM MUTATA


   THERE was a time in Europe long ago
      When no man died for freedom anywhere,
      But England’s lion leaping from its lair
   Laid hands on the oppressor! it was so
   While England could a great Republic show.
      Witness the men of Piedmont, chiefest care
      Of Cromwell, when with impotent despair
   The Pontiff in his painted portico
   Trembled before our stern ambassadors.
      How comes it then that from such high estate
      We have thus fallen, save that Luxury
   With barren merchandise piles up the gate
   Where noble thoughts and deeds should enter by:
      Else might we still be Milton’s heritors.


LIBERTATIS SACRA FAMES


   ALBEIT nurtured in democracy,
      And liking best that state republican
      Where every man is Kinglike and no man
   Is crowned above his fellows, yet I see,
   Spite of this modern fret for Liberty,
      Better the rule of One, whom all obey,
      Than to let clamorous demagogues betray
   Our freedom with the kiss of anarchy.
   Wherefore I love them not whose hands profane
      Plant the red flag upon the piled-up street
      For no right cause, beneath whose ignorant reign
   Arts, Culture, Reverence, Honour, all things fade,
      Save Treason and the dagger of her trade,
      Or Murder with his silent bloody feet.


THEORETIKOS


   THIS mighty empire hath but feet of clay:
      Of all its ancient chivalry and might
      Our little island is forsaken quite:
   Some enemy hath stolen its crown of bay,
   And from its hills that voice hath passed away
      Which spake of Freedom: O come out of it,
      Come out of it, my Soul, thou art not fit
   For this vile traffic-house, where day by day
      Wisdom and reverence are sold at mart,
      And the rude people rage with ignorant cries
   Against an heritage of centuries.
      It mars my calm: wherefore in dreams of Art
      And loftiest culture I would stand apart,
   Neither for God, nor for his enemies.



THE GARDEN OF EROS


   IT is full summer now, the heart of June;
      Not yet the sunburnt reapers are astir
   Upon the upland meadow where too soon
      Rich autumn time, the season’s usurer,
   Will lend his hoarded gold to all the trees,
   And see his treasure scattered by the wild and spendthrift breeze.

   Too soon indeed! yet here the daffodil,
      That love-child of the Spring, has lingered on
   To vex the rose with jealousy, and still
      The harebell spreads her azure pavilion,
   And like a strayed and wandering reveller
   Abandoned of its brothers, whom long since June’s messenger

   The missel-thrush has frighted from the glade,
      One pale narcissus loiters fearfully
   Close to a shadowy nook, where half afraid
      Of their own loveliness some violets lie
   That will not look the gold sun in the face
   For fear of too much splendour,—ah! methinks it is a place

   Which should be trodden by Persephone
      When wearied of the flowerless fields of Dis!
   Or danced on by the lads of Arcady!
      The hidden secret of eternal bliss
   Known to the Grecian here a man might find,
   Ah! you and I may find it now if Love and Sleep be kind.

   There are the flowers which mourning Herakles
      Strewed on the tomb of Hylas, columbine,
   Its white doves all a-flutter where the breeze
      Kissed them too harshly, the small celandine,
   That yellow-kirtled chorister of eve,
   And lilac lady’s-smock,—but let them bloom alone, and leave

   Yon spirèd hollyhock red-crocketed
      To sway its silent chimes, else must the bee,
   Its little bellringer, go seek instead
      Some other pleasaunce; the anemone
   That weeps at daybreak, like a silly girl
   Before her love, and hardly lets the butterflies unfurl

   Their painted wings beside it,—bid it pine
      In pale virginity; the winter snow
   Will suit it better than those lips of thine
      Whose fires would but scorch it, rather go
   And pluck that amorous flower which blooms alone,
   Fed by the pander wind with dust of kisses not its own.

   The trumpet-mouths of red convolvulus
      So dear to maidens, creamy meadow-sweet
   Whiter than Juno’s throat and odorous
      As all Arabia, hyacinths the feet
   Of Huntress Dian would be loth to mar
   For any dappled fawn,—pluck these, and those fond flowers which are

   Fairer than what Queen Venus trod upon
      Beneath the pines of Ida, eucharis,
   That morning star which does not dread the sun,
      And budding marjoram which but to kiss
   Would sweeten Cytheræa’s lips and make
   Adonis jealous,—these for thy head,—and for thy girdle take

   Yon curving spray of purple clematis
      Whose gorgeous dye outflames the Tyrian King,
   And foxgloves with their nodding chalices,
      But that one narciss which the startled Spring
   Let from her kirtle fall when first she heard
   In her own woods the wild tempestuous song of summer’s bird,

   Ah! leave it for a subtle memory
      Of those sweet tremulous days of rain and sun,
   When April laughed between her tears to see
      The early primrose with shy footsteps run
   From the gnarled oak-tree roots till all the wold,
   Spite of its brown and trampled leaves, grew bright with shimmering
   gold.

   Nay, pluck it too, it is not half so sweet
      As thou thyself, my soul’s idolatry!
   And when thou art a-wearied at thy feet
      Shall oxlips weave their brightest tapestry,
   For thee the woodbine shall forget its pride
   And veil its tangled whorls, and thou shalt walk on daisies pied.

   And I will cut a reed by yonder spring
      And make the wood-gods jealous, and old Pan
   Wonder what young intruder dares to sing
      In these still haunts, where never foot of man
   Should tread at evening, lest he chance to spy
   The marble limbs of Artemis and all her company.

   And I will tell thee why the jacinth wears
      Such dread embroidery of dolorous moan,
   And why the hapless nightingale forbears
      To sing her song at noon, but weeps alone
   When the fleet swallow sleeps, and rich men feast,
   And why the laurel trembles when she sees the lightening east.

   And I will sing how sad Proserpina
      Unto a grave and gloomy Lord was wed,
   And lure the silver-breasted Helena
      Back from the lotus meadows of the dead,
   So shalt thou see that awful loveliness
   For which two mighty Hosts met fearfully in war’s abyss!

   And then I’ll pipe to thee that Grecian tale
      How Cynthia loves the lad Endymion,
   And hidden in a grey and misty veil
      Hies to the cliffs of Latmos once the Sun
   Leaps from his ocean bed in fruitless chase
   Of those pale flying feet which fade away in his embrace.

   And if my flute can breathe sweet melody,
      We may behold Her face who long ago
   Dwelt among men by the Ægean sea,
      And whose sad house with pillaged portico
   And friezeless wall and columns toppled down
   Looms o’er the ruins of that fair and violet cinctured town.

   Spirit of Beauty! tarry still awhile,
      They are not dead, thine ancient votaries;
   Some few there are to whom thy radiant smile
      Is better than a thousand victories,
   Though all the nobly slain of Waterloo
   Rise up in wrath against them! tarry still, there are a few

   Who for thy sake would give their manlihood
      And consecrate their being; I at least
   Have done so, made thy lips my daily food,
      And in thy temples found a goodlier feast
   Than this starved age can give me, spite of all
   Its new-found creeds so sceptical and so dogmatical.

   Here not Cephissos, not Ilissos flows,
      The woods of white Colonos are not here,
   On our bleak hills the olive never blows,
      No simple priest conducts his lowing steer
   Up the steep marble way, nor through the town
   Do laughing maidens bear to thee the crocus-flowered gown.

   Yet tarry! for the boy who loved thee best,
      Whose very name should be a memory
   To make thee linger, sleeps in silent rest
      Beneath the Roman walls, and melody
   Still mourns her sweetest lyre; none can play
   The lute of Adonais: with his lips Song passed away.

   Nay, when Keats died the Muses still had left
      One silver voice to sing his threnody,
   But ah! too soon of it we were bereft
      When on that riven night and stormy sea
   Panthea claimed her singer as her own,
   And slew the mouth that praised her; since which time we walk alone,

   Save for that fiery heart, that morning star
      Of re-arisen England, whose clear eye
   Saw from our tottering throne and waste of war
      The grand Greek limbs of young Democracy
   Rise mightily like Hesperus and bring
   The great Republic! him at least thy love hath taught to sing,

   And he hath been with thee at Thessaly,
      And seen white Atalanta fleet of foot
   In passionless and fierce virginity
      Hunting the tuskèd boar, his honied lute
   Hath pierced the cavern of the hollow hill,
   And Venus laughs to know one knee will bow before her still.

   And he hath kissed the lips of Proserpine,
      And sung the Galilæan’s requiem,
   That wounded forehead dashed with blood and wine
      He hath discrowned, the Ancient Gods in him
   Have found their last, most ardent worshipper,
   And the new Sign grows grey and dim before its conqueror.

   Spirit of Beauty! tarry with us still,
      It is not quenched the torch of poesy,
   The star that shook above the Eastern hill
      Holds unassailed its argent armoury
   From all the gathering gloom and fretful fight—
   O tarry with us still! for through the long and common night,

   Morris, our sweet and simple Chaucer’s child,
      Dear heritor of Spenser’s tuneful reed,
   With soft and sylvan pipe has oft beguiled
      The weary soul of man in troublous need,
   And from the far and flowerless fields of ice
   Has brought fair flowers to make an earthly paradise.

   We know them all, Gudrun the strong men’s bride,
      Aslaug and Olafson we know them all,
   How giant Grettir fought and Sigurd died,
      And what enchantment held the king in thrall
   When lonely Brynhild wrestled with the powers
   That war against all passion, ah! how oft through summer hours,

   Long listless summer hours when the noon
      Being enamoured of a damask rose
   Forgets to journey westward, till the moon
      The pale usurper of its tribute grows
   From a thin sickle to a silver shield
   And chides its loitering car—how oft, in some cool grassy field

   Far from the cricket-ground and noisy eight,
      At Bagley, where the rustling bluebells come
   Almost before the blackbird finds a mate
      And overstay the swallow, and the hum
   Of many murmuring bees flits through the leaves,
   Have I lain poring on the dreamy tales his fancy weaves,

   And through their unreal woes and mimic pain
      Wept for myself, and so was purified,
   And in their simple mirth grew glad again;
      For as I sailed upon that pictured tide
   The strength and splendour of the storm was mine
   Without the storm’s red ruin, for the singer is divine;

   The little laugh of water falling down
      Is not so musical, the clammy gold
   Close hoarded in the tiny waxen town
      Has less of sweetness in it, and the old
   Half-withered reeds that waved in Arcady
   Touched by his lips break forth again to fresher harmony.

   Spirit of Beauty, tarry yet awhile!
      Although the cheating merchants of the mart
   With iron roads profane our lovely isle,
      And break on whirling wheels the limbs of Art,
   Ay! though the crowded factories beget
   The blindworm Ignorance that slays the soul, O tarry yet!

   For One at least there is,—He bears his name
      From Dante and the seraph Gabriel,—
   Whose double laurels burn with deathless flame
      To light thine altar; He too loves thee well,
   Who saw old Merlin lured in Vivien’s snare,
   And the white feet of angels coming down the golden stair,

   Loves thee so well, that all the World for him
      A gorgeous-coloured vestiture must wear,
   And Sorrow take a purple diadem,
      Or else be no more Sorrow, and Despair
   Gild its own thorns, and Pain, like Adon, be
   Even in anguish beautiful;—such is the empery

   Which Painters hold, and such the heritage
      This gentle solemn Spirit doth possess,
   Being a better mirror of his age
      In all his pity, love, and weariness,
   Than those who can but copy common things,
   And leave the Soul unpainted with its mighty questionings.

   But they are few, and all romance has flown,
      And men can prophesy about the sun,
   And lecture on his arrows—how, alone,
      Through a waste void the soulless atoms run,
   How from each tree its weeping nymph has fled,
   And that no more ’mid English reeds a Naiad shows her head.

   Methinks these new Actæons boast too soon
      That they have spied on beauty; what if we
   Have analysed the rainbow, robbed the moon
      Of her most ancient, chastest mystery,
   Shall I, the last Endymion, lose all hope
   Because rude eyes peer at my mistress through a telescope!

   What profit if this scientific age
      Burst through our gates with all its retinue
   Of modern miracles!  Can it assuage
      One lover’s breaking heart? what can it do
   To make one life more beautiful, one day
   More godlike in its period? but now the Age of Clay

   Returns in horrid cycle, and the earth
      Hath borne again a noisy progeny
   Of ignorant Titans, whose ungodly birth
      Hurls them against the august hierarchy
   Which sat upon Olympus; to the Dust
   They have appealed, and to that barren arbiter they must

   Repair for judgment; let them, if they can,
      From Natural Warfare and insensate Chance,
   Create the new Ideal rule for man!
      Methinks that was not my inheritance;
   For I was nurtured otherwise, my soul
   Passes from higher heights of life to a more supreme goal.

   Lo! while we spake the earth did turn away
      Her visage from the God, and Hecate’s boat
   Rose silver-laden, till the jealous day
      Blew all its torches out: I did not note
   The waning hours, to young Endymions
   Time’s palsied fingers count in vain his rosary of suns!

   Mark how the yellow iris wearily
      Leans back its throat, as though it would be kissed
   By its false chamberer, the dragon-fly,
      Who, like a blue vein on a girl’s white wrist,
   Sleeps on that snowy primrose of the night,
   Which ’gins to flush with crimson shame, and die beneath the light.

   Come let us go, against the pallid shield
      Of the wan sky the almond blossoms gleam,
   The corncrake nested in the unmown field
      Answers its mate, across the misty stream
   On fitful wing the startled curlews fly,
   And in his sedgy bed the lark, for joy that Day is nigh,

   Scatters the pearlèd dew from off the grass,
      In tremulous ecstasy to greet the sun,
   Who soon in gilded panoply will pass
      Forth from yon orange-curtained pavilion
   Hung in the burning east: see, the red rim
   O’ertops the expectant hills! it is the God! for love of him

   Already the shrill lark is out of sight,
      Flooding with waves of song this silent dell,—
   Ah! there is something more in that bird’s flight
      Than could be tested in a crucible!—
   But the air freshens, let us go, why soon
   The woodmen will be here; how we have lived this night of June!



ROSA MYSTICA


REQUIESCAT


   TREAD lightly, she is near
      Under the snow,
   Speak gently, she can hear
      The daisies grow.

   All her bright golden hair
      Tarnished with rust,
   She that was young and fair
      Fallen to dust.

   Lily-like, white as snow,
      She hardly knew
   She was a woman, so
      Sweetly she grew.

   Coffin-board, heavy stone,
      Lie on her breast,
   I vex my heart alone,
      She is at rest.

   Peace, Peace, she cannot hear
      Lyre or sonnet,
   All my life’s buried here,
      Heap earth upon it.

AVIGNON.


SONNET ON APPROACHING ITALY


   I REACHED the Alps: the soul within me burned,
      Italia, my Italia, at thy name:
      And when from out the mountain’s heart I came
   And saw the land for which my life had yearned,
   I laughed as one who some great prize had earned:
      And musing on the marvel of thy fame
      I watched the day, till marked with wounds of flame
   The turquoise sky to burnished gold was turned.
   The pine-trees waved as waves a woman’s hair,
      And in the orchards every twining spray
      Was breaking into flakes of blossoming foam:
   But when I knew that far away at Rome
      In evil bonds a second Peter lay,
      I wept to see the land so very fair.

TURIN.


SAN MINIATO


      SEE, I have climbed the mountain side
      Up to this holy house of God,
      Where once that Angel-Painter trod
   Who saw the heavens opened wide,

      And throned upon the crescent moon
      The Virginal white Queen of Grace,—
      Mary! could I but see thy face
   Death could not come at all too soon.

      O crowned by God with thorns and pain!
      Mother of Christ!  O mystic wife!
      My heart is weary of this life
   And over-sad to sing again.

      O crowned by God with love and flame!
      O crowned by Christ the Holy One!
      O listen ere the searching sun
   Show to the world my sin and shame.


AVE MARIA GRATIA PLENA


   WAS this His coming!  I had hoped to see
      A scene of wondrous glory, as was told
      Of some great God who in a rain of gold
   Broke open bars and fell on Danae:
   Or a dread vision as when Semele
      Sickening for love and unappeased desire
      Prayed to see God’s clear body, and the fire
   Caught her brown limbs and slew her utterly:
   With such glad dreams I sought this holy place,
      And now with wondering eyes and heart I stand
      Before this supreme mystery of Love:
   Some kneeling girl with passionless pale face,
      An angel with a lily in his hand,
      And over both the white wings of a Dove.

FLORENCE.


ITALIA


   ITALIA! thou art fallen, though with sheen
      Of battle-spears thy clamorous armies stride
      From the north Alps to the Sicilian tide!
   Ay! fallen, though the nations hail thee Queen
   Because rich gold in every town is seen,
      And on thy sapphire-lake in tossing pride
      Of wind-filled vans thy myriad galleys ride
   Beneath one flag of red and white and green.
   O Fair and Strong!  O Strong and Fair in vain!
      Look southward where Rome’s desecrated town
      Lies mourning for her God-anointed King!
   Look heaven-ward! shall God allow this thing?
      Nay! but some flame-girt Raphael shall come down,
      And smite the Spoiler with the sword of pain.

VENICE.


SONNET


                      WRITTEN IN HOLY WEEK AT GENOA

   I WANDERED through Scoglietto’s far retreat,
      The oranges on each o’erhanging spray
      Burned as bright lamps of gold to shame the day;
   Some startled bird with fluttering wings and fleet
   Made snow of all the blossoms; at my feet
      Like silver moons the pale narcissi lay:
      And the curved waves that streaked the great green bay
   Laughed i’ the sun, and life seemed very sweet.
   Outside the young boy-priest passed singing clear,
      ‘Jesus the son of Mary has been slain,
      O come and fill His sepulchre with flowers.’
   Ah, God!  Ah, God! those dear Hellenic hours
      Had drowned all memory of Thy bitter pain,
      The Cross, the Crown, the Soldiers and the Spear.


ROME UNVISITED


                                     I.

   THE corn has turned from grey to red,
      Since first my spirit wandered forth
      From the drear cities of the north,
   And to Italia’s mountains fled.

   And here I set my face towards home,
      For all my pilgrimage is done,
      Although, methinks, yon blood-red sun
   Marshals the way to Holy Rome.

   O Blessed Lady, who dost hold
      Upon the seven hills thy reign!
      O Mother without blot or stain,
   Crowned with bright crowns of triple gold!

   O Roma, Roma, at thy feet
      I lay this barren gift of song!
      For, ah! the way is steep and long
   That leads unto thy sacred street.

                                     II.

   AND yet what joy it were for me
      To turn my feet unto the south,
      And journeying towards the Tiber mouth
   To kneel again at Fiesole!

   And wandering through the tangled pines
      That break the gold of Arno’s stream,
      To see the purple mist and gleam
   Of morning on the Apennines

   By many a vineyard-hidden home,
      Orchard and olive-garden grey,
      Till from the drear Campagna’s way
   The seven hills bear up the dome!

                                    III.

   A PILGRIM from the northern seas—
      What joy for me to seek alone
      The wondrous temple and the throne
   Of him who holds the awful keys!

   When, bright with purple and with gold
      Come priest and holy cardinal,
      And borne above the heads of all
   The gentle Shepherd of the Fold.

   O joy to see before I die
      The only God-anointed king,
      And hear the silver trumpets ring
   A triumph as he passes by!

   Or at the brazen-pillared shrine
      Holds high the mystic sacrifice,
      And shows his God to human eyes
   Beneath the veil of bread and wine.

                                     IV.

   FOR lo, what changes time can bring!
      The cycles of revolving years
      May free my heart from all its fears,
   And teach my lips a song to sing.

   Before yon field of trembling gold
      Is garnered into dusty sheaves,
      Or ere the autumn’s scarlet leaves
   Flutter as birds adown the wold,

   I may have run the glorious race,
      And caught the torch while yet aflame,
      And called upon the holy name
   Of Him who now doth hide His face.

ARONA.


URBS SACRA ÆTERNA


   ROME! what a scroll of History thine has been;
      In the first days thy sword republican
      Ruled the whole world for many an age’s span:
   Then of the peoples wert thou royal Queen,
   Till in thy streets the bearded Goth was seen;
      And now upon thy walls the breezes fan
      (Ah, city crowned by God, discrowned by man!)
   The hated flag of red and white and green.
   When was thy glory! when in search for power
      Thine eagles flew to greet the double sun,
      And the wild nations shuddered at thy rod?
   Nay, but thy glory tarried for this hour,
      When pilgrims kneel before the Holy One,
      The prisoned shepherd of the Church of God.

MONTRE MARIO.


SONNET


            ON HEARING THE DIES IRÆ SUNG IN THE SISTINE CHAPEL

   NAY, Lord, not thus! white lilies in the spring,
   Sad olive-groves, or silver-breasted dove,
      Teach me more clearly of Thy life and love
   Than terrors of red flame and thundering.
   The hillside vines dear memories of Thee bring:
      A bird at evening flying to its nest
      Tells me of One who had no place of rest:
   I think it is of Thee the sparrows sing.
   Come rather on some autumn afternoon,
      When red and brown are burnished on the leaves,
      And the fields echo to the gleaner’s song,
   Come when the splendid fulness of the moon
      Looks down upon the rows of golden sheaves,
      And reap Thy harvest: we have waited long.


EASTER DAY


   THE silver trumpets rang across the Dome:
      The people knelt upon the ground with awe:
      And borne upon the necks of men I saw,
   Like some great God, the Holy Lord of Rome.
   Priest-like, he wore a robe more white than foam,
      And, king-like, swathed himself in royal red,
      Three crowns of gold rose high upon his head:
   In splendour and in light the Pope passed home.
   My heart stole back across wide wastes of years
      To One who wandered by a lonely sea,
      And sought in vain for any place of rest:
   ‘Foxes have holes, and every bird its nest.
      I, only I, must wander wearily,
      And bruise my feet, and drink wine salt with tears.’


E TENEBRIS


   COME down, O Christ, and help me! reach Thy hand,
      For I am drowning in a stormier sea
      Than Simon on Thy lake of Galilee:
   The wine of life is spilt upon the sand,
   My heart is as some famine-murdered land
      Whence all good things have perished utterly,
      And well I know my soul in Hell must lie
   If I this night before God’s throne should stand.
   ‘He sleeps perchance, or rideth to the chase,
      Like Baal, when his prophets howled that name
      From morn to noon on Carmel’s smitten height.’
   Nay, peace, I shall behold, before the night,
      The feet of brass, the robe more white than flame,
      The wounded hands, the weary human face.


VITA NUOVA


   I STOOD by the unvintageable sea
      Till the wet waves drenched face and hair with spray;
      The long red fires of the dying day
   Burned in the west; the wind piped drearily;
   And to the land the clamorous gulls did flee:
      ‘Alas!’ I cried, ‘my life is full of pain,
      And who can garner fruit or golden grain
   From these waste fields which travail ceaselessly!’
   My nets gaped wide with many a break and flaw,
      Nathless I threw them as my final cast
      Into the sea, and waited for the end.
   When lo! a sudden glory! and I saw
      From the black waters of my tortured past
      The argent splendour of white limbs ascend!


MADONNA MIA


   A LILY-GIRL, not made for this world’s pain,
      With brown, soft hair close braided by her ears,
      And longing eyes half veiled by slumberous tears
   Like bluest water seen through mists of rain:
   Pale cheeks whereon no love hath left its stain,
      Red underlip drawn in for fear of love,
      And white throat, whiter than the silvered dove,
   Through whose wan marble creeps one purple vein.
   Yet, though my lips shall praise her without cease,
      Even to kiss her feet I am not bold,
      Being o’ershadowed by the wings of awe,
   Like Dante, when he stood with Beatrice
      Beneath the flaming Lion’s breast, and saw
      The seventh Crystal, and the Stair of Gold.


THE NEW HELEN


   WHERE hast thou been since round the walls of Troy
      The sons of God fought in that great emprise?
         Why dost thou walk our common earth again?
   Hast thou forgotten that impassioned boy,
         His purple galley and his Tyrian men
      And treacherous Aphrodite’s mocking eyes?
   For surely it was thou, who, like a star
      Hung in the silver silence of the night,
      Didst lure the Old World’s chivalry and might
   Into the clamorous crimson waves of war!

   Or didst thou rule the fire-laden moon?
      In amorous Sidon was thy temple built
         Over the light and laughter of the sea
      Where, behind lattice scarlet-wrought and gilt,
         Some brown-limbed girl did weave thee tapestry,
   All through the waste and wearied hours of noon;
   Till her wan cheek with flame of passion burned,
      And she rose up the sea-washed lips to kiss
   Of some glad Cyprian sailor, safe returned
      From Calpé and the cliffs of Herakles!

   No! thou art Helen, and none other one!
      It was for thee that young Sarpedôn died,
         And Memnôn’s manhood was untimely spent;
      It was for thee gold-crested Hector tried
   With Thetis’ child that evil race to run,
         In the last year of thy beleaguerment;
   Ay! even now the glory of thy fame
      Burns in those fields of trampled asphodel,
      Where the high lords whom Ilion knew so well
   Clash ghostly shields, and call upon thy name.

   Where hast thou been? in that enchanted land
      Whose slumbering vales forlorn Calypso knew,
         Where never mower rose at break of day
      But all unswathed the trammelling grasses grew,
   And the sad shepherd saw the tall corn stand
         Till summer’s red had changed to withered grey?
   Didst thou lie there by some Lethæan stream
      Deep brooding on thine ancient memory,
      The crash of broken spears, the fiery gleam
   From shivered helm, the Grecian battle-cry?

   Nay, thou wert hidden in that hollow hill
      With one who is forgotten utterly,
         That discrowned Queen men call the Erycine;
      Hidden away that never mightst thou see
   The face of Her, before whose mouldering shrine
         To-day at Rome the silent nations kneel;
   Who gat from Love no joyous gladdening,
      But only Love’s intolerable pain,
      Only a sword to pierce her heart in twain,
   Only the bitterness of child-bearing.

   The lotus-leaves which heal the wounds of Death
      Lie in thy hand; O, be thou kind to me,
         While yet I know the summer of my days;
      For hardly can my tremulous lips draw breath
   To fill the silver trumpet with thy praise,
         So bowed am I before thy mystery;
   So bowed and broken on Love’s terrible wheel,
      That I have lost all hope and heart to sing,
      Yet care I not what ruin time may bring
   If in thy temple thou wilt let me kneel.

   Alas, alas, thou wilt not tarry here,
      But, like that bird, the servant of the sun,
         Who flies before the north wind and the night,
      So wilt thou fly our evil land and drear,
   Back to the tower of thine old delight,
         And the red lips of young Euphorion;
   Nor shall I ever see thy face again,
      But in this poisonous garden-close must stay,
      Crowning my brows with the thorn-crown of pain,
   Till all my loveless life shall pass away.

   O Helen!  Helen! Helen! yet a while,
      Yet for a little while, O, tarry here,
         Till the dawn cometh and the shadows flee!
      For in the gladsome sunlight of thy smile
   Of heaven or hell I have no thought or fear,
         Seeing I know no other god but thee:
   No other god save him, before whose feet
      In nets of gold the tired planets move,
      The incarnate spirit of spiritual love
   Who in thy body holds his joyous seat.

   Thou wert not born as common women are!
      But, girt with silver splendour of the foam,
         Didst from the depths of sapphire seas arise!
      And at thy coming some immortal star,
   Bearded with flame, blazed in the Eastern skies,
         And waked the shepherds on thine island-home.
   Thou shalt not die: no asps of Egypt creep
      Close at thy heels to taint the delicate air;
      No sullen-blooming poppies stain thy hair,
   Those scarlet heralds of eternal sleep.

   Lily of love, pure and inviolate!
      Tower of ivory! red rose of fire!
         Thou hast come down our darkness to illume:
   For we, close-caught in the wide nets of Fate,
      Wearied with waiting for the World’s Desire,
         Aimlessly wandered in the House of gloom,
   Aimlessly sought some slumberous anodyne
      For wasted lives, for lingering wretchedness,
   Till we beheld thy re-arisen shrine,
      And the white glory of thy loveliness.



THE BURDEN OF ITYS


   THIS English Thames is holier far than Rome,
      Those harebells like a sudden flush of sea
   Breaking across the woodland, with the foam
      Of meadow-sweet and white anemone
   To fleck their blue waves,—God is likelier there
   Than hidden in that crystal-hearted star the pale monks bear!

   Those violet-gleaming butterflies that take
      Yon creamy lily for their pavilion
   Are monsignores, and where the rushes shake
      A lazy pike lies basking in the sun,
   His eyes half shut,—he is some mitred old
   Bishop in _partibus_! look at those gaudy scales all green and gold.

   The wind the restless prisoner of the trees
      Does well for Palæstrina, one would say
   The mighty master’s hands were on the keys
      Of the Maria organ, which they play
   When early on some sapphire Easter morn
   In a high litter red as blood or sin the Pope is borne

   From his dark House out to the Balcony
      Above the bronze gates and the crowded square,
   Whose very fountains seem for ecstasy
      To toss their silver lances in the air,
   And stretching out weak hands to East and West
   In vain sends peace to peaceless lands, to restless nations rest.

   Is not yon lingering orange after-glow
      That stays to vex the moon more fair than all
   Rome’s lordliest pageants! strange, a year ago
      I knelt before some crimson Cardinal
   Who bare the Host across the Esquiline,
   And now—those common poppies in the wheat seem twice as fine.

   The blue-green beanfields yonder, tremulous
      With the last shower, sweeter perfume bring
   Through this cool evening than the odorous
      Flame-jewelled censers the young deacons swing,
   When the grey priest unlocks the curtained shrine,
   And makes God’s body from the common fruit of corn and vine.

   Poor Fra Giovanni bawling at the mass
      Were out of tune now, for a small brown bird
   Sings overhead, and through the long cool grass
      I see that throbbing throat which once I heard
   On starlit hills of flower-starred Arcady,
   Once where the white and crescent sand of Salamis meets sea.

   Sweet is the swallow twittering on the eaves
      At daybreak, when the mower whets his scythe,
   And stock-doves murmur, and the milkmaid leaves
      Her little lonely bed, and carols blithe
   To see the heavy-lowing cattle wait
   Stretching their huge and dripping mouths across the farmyard gate.

   And sweet the hops upon the Kentish leas,
      And sweet the wind that lifts the new-mown hay,
   And sweet the fretful swarms of grumbling bees
      That round and round the linden blossoms play;
   And sweet the heifer breathing in the stall,
   And the green bursting figs that hang upon the red-brick wall,

   And sweet to hear the cuckoo mock the spring
      While the last violet loiters by the well,
   And sweet to hear the shepherd Daphnis sing
      The song of Linus through a sunny dell
   Of warm Arcadia where the corn is gold
   And the slight lithe-limbed reapers dance about the wattled fold.

   And sweet with young Lycoris to recline
      In some Illyrian valley far away,
   Where canopied on herbs amaracine
      We too might waste the summer-trancèd day
   Matching our reeds in sportive rivalry,
   While far beneath us frets the troubled purple of the sea.

   But sweeter far if silver-sandalled foot
      Of some long-hidden God should ever tread
   The Nuneham meadows, if with reeded flute
      Pressed to his lips some Faun might raise his head
   By the green water-flags, ah! sweet indeed
   To see the heavenly herdsman call his white-fleeced flock to feed.

   Then sing to me thou tuneful chorister,
      Though what thou sing’st be thine own requiem!
   Tell me thy tale thou hapless chronicler
      Of thine own tragedies! do not contemn
   These unfamiliar haunts, this English field,
   For many a lovely coronal our northern isle can yield

   Which Grecian meadows know not, many a rose
      Which all day long in vales Æolian
   A lad might seek in vain for over-grows
      Our hedges like a wanton courtesan
   Unthrifty of its beauty; lilies too
   Ilissos never mirrored star our streams, and cockles blue

   Dot the green wheat which, though they are the signs
      For swallows going south, would never spread
   Their azure tents between the Attic vines;
      Even that little weed of ragged red,
   Which bids the robin pipe, in Arcady
   Would be a trespasser, and many an unsung elegy

   Sleeps in the reeds that fringe our winding Thames
      Which to awake were sweeter ravishment
   Than ever Syrinx wept for; diadems
      Of brown bee-studded orchids which were meant
   For Cytheræa’s brows are hidden here
   Unknown to Cytheræa, and by yonder pasturing steer

   There is a tiny yellow daffodil,
      The butterfly can see it from afar,
   Although one summer evening’s dew could fill
      Its little cup twice over ere the star
   Had called the lazy shepherd to his fold
   And be no prodigal; each leaf is flecked with spotted gold

   As if Jove’s gorgeous leman Danae
      Hot from his gilded arms had stooped to kiss
   The trembling petals, or young Mercury
      Low-flying to the dusky ford of Dis
   Had with one feather of his pinions
   Just brushed them! the slight stem which bears the burden of its suns

   Is hardly thicker than the gossamer,
      Or poor Arachne’s silver tapestry,—
   Men say it bloomed upon the sepulchre
      Of One I sometime worshipped, but to me
   It seems to bring diviner memories
   Of faun-loved Heliconian glades and blue nymph-haunted seas,

   Of an untrodden vale at Tempe where
      On the clear river’s marge Narcissus lies,
   The tangle of the forest in his hair,
      The silence of the woodland in his eyes,
   Wooing that drifting imagery which is
   No sooner kissed than broken; memories of Salmacis

   Who is not boy nor girl and yet is both,
      Fed by two fires and unsatisfied
   Through their excess, each passion being loth
      For love’s own sake to leave the other’s side
   Yet killing love by staying; memories
   Of Oreads peeping through the leaves of silent moonlit trees,

   Of lonely Ariadne on the wharf
      At Naxos, when she saw the treacherous crew
   Far out at sea, and waved her crimson scarf
      And called false Theseus back again nor knew
   That Dionysos on an amber pard
   Was close behind her; memories of what Mæonia’s bard

   With sightless eyes beheld, the wall of Troy,
      Queen Helen lying in the ivory room,
   And at her side an amorous red-lipped boy
      Trimming with dainty hand his helmet’s plume,
   And far away the moil, the shout, the groan,
   As Hector shielded off the spear and Ajax hurled the stone;

   Of wingèd Perseus with his flawless sword
      Cleaving the snaky tresses of the witch,
   And all those tales imperishably stored
      In little Grecian urns, freightage more rich
   Than any gaudy galleon of Spain
   Bare from the Indies ever! these at least bring back again,

   For well I know they are not dead at all,
      The ancient Gods of Grecian poesy:
   They are asleep, and when they hear thee call
      Will wake and think ’t is very Thessaly,
   This Thames the Daulian waters, this cool glade
   The yellow-irised mead where once young Itys laughed and played.

   If it was thou dear jasmine-cradled bird
      Who from the leafy stillness of thy throne
   Sang to the wondrous boy, until he heard
      The horn of Atalanta faintly blown
   Across the Cumnor hills, and wandering
   Through Bagley wood at evening found the Attic poets’ spring,—

   Ah! tiny sober-suited advocate
      That pleadest for the moon against the day!
   If thou didst make the shepherd seek his mate
      On that sweet questing, when Proserpina
   Forgot it was not Sicily and leant
   Across the mossy Sandford stile in ravished wonderment,—

   Light-winged and bright-eyed miracle of the wood!
      If ever thou didst soothe with melody
   One of that little clan, that brotherhood
      Which loved the morning-star of Tuscany
   More than the perfect sun of Raphael
   And is immortal, sing to me! for I too love thee well.

   Sing on! sing on! let the dull world grow young,
      Let elemental things take form again,
   And the old shapes of Beauty walk among
      The simple garths and open crofts, as when
   The son of Leto bare the willow rod,
   And the soft sheep and shaggy goats followed the boyish God.

   Sing on! sing on! and Bacchus will be here
      Astride upon his gorgeous Indian throne,
   And over whimpering tigers shake the spear
      With yellow ivy crowned and gummy cone,
   While at his side the wanton Bassarid
   Will throw the lion by the mane and catch the mountain kid!

   Sing on! and I will wear the leopard skin,
      And steal the moonèd wings of Ashtaroth,
   Upon whose icy chariot we could win
      Cithæron in an hour ere the froth
   Has over-brimmed the wine-vat or the Faun
   Ceased from the treading! ay, before the flickering lamp of dawn

   Has scared the hooting owlet to its nest,
      And warned the bat to close its filmy vans,
   Some Mænad girl with vine-leaves on her breast
      Will filch their beech-nuts from the sleeping Pans
   So softly that the little nested thrush
   Will never wake, and then with shrilly laugh and leap will rush

   Down the green valley where the fallen dew
      Lies thick beneath the elm and count her store,
   Till the brown Satyrs in a jolly crew
      Trample the loosestrife down along the shore,
   And where their hornèd master sits in state
   Bring strawberries and bloomy plums upon a wicker crate!

   Sing on! and soon with passion-wearied face
      Through the cool leaves Apollo’s lad will come,
   The Tyrian prince his bristled boar will chase
      Adown the chestnut-copses all a-bloom,
   And ivory-limbed, grey-eyed, with look of pride,
   After yon velvet-coated deer the virgin maid will ride.

   Sing on! and I the dying boy will see
      Stain with his purple blood the waxen bell
   That overweighs the jacinth, and to me
      The wretched Cyprian her woe will tell,
   And I will kiss her mouth and streaming eyes,
   And lead her to the myrtle-hidden grove where Adon lies!

   Cry out aloud on Itys! memory
      That foster-brother of remorse and pain
   Drops poison in mine ear,—O to be free,
      To burn one’s old ships! and to launch again
   Into the white-plumed battle of the waves
   And fight old Proteus for the spoil of coral-flowered caves!

   O for Medea with her poppied spell!
      O for the secret of the Colchian shrine!
   O for one leaf of that pale asphodel
      Which binds the tired brows of Proserpine,
   And sheds such wondrous dews at eve that she
   Dreams of the fields of Enna, by the far Sicilian sea,

   Where oft the golden-girdled bee she chased
      From lily to lily on the level mead,
   Ere yet her sombre Lord had bid her taste
      The deadly fruit of that pomegranate seed,
   Ere the black steeds had harried her away
   Down to the faint and flowerless land, the sick and sunless day.

   O for one midnight and as paramour
      The Venus of the little Melian farm!
   O that some antique statue for one hour
      Might wake to passion, and that I could charm
   The Dawn at Florence from its dumb despair,
   Mix with those mighty limbs and make that giant breast my lair!

   Sing on! sing on!  I would be drunk with life,
      Drunk with the trampled vintage of my youth,
   I would forget the wearying wasted strife,
      The riven veil, the Gorgon eyes of Truth,
   The prayerless vigil and the cry for prayer,
   The barren gifts, the lifted arms, the dull insensate air!

   Sing on! sing on!  O feathered Niobe,
      Thou canst make sorrow beautiful, and steal
   From joy its sweetest music, not as we
      Who by dead voiceless silence strive to heal
   Our too untented wounds, and do but keep
   Pain barricadoed in our hearts, and murder pillowed sleep.

   Sing louder yet, why must I still behold
      The wan white face of that deserted Christ,
   Whose bleeding hands my hands did once enfold,
      Whose smitten lips my lips so oft have kissed,
   And now in mute and marble misery
   Sits in his lone dishonoured House and weeps, perchance for me?

   O Memory cast down thy wreathèd shell!
      Break thy hoarse lute O sad Melpomene!
   O Sorrow, Sorrow keep thy cloistered cell
      Nor dim with tears this limpid Castaly!
   Cease, Philomel, thou dost the forest wrong
   To vex its sylvan quiet with such wild impassioned song!

   Cease, cease, or if ’t is anguish to be dumb
      Take from the pastoral thrush her simpler air,
   Whose jocund carelessness doth more become
      This English woodland than thy keen despair,
   Ah! cease and let the north wind bear thy lay
   Back to the rocky hills of Thrace, the stormy Daulian bay.

   A moment more, the startled leaves had stirred,
      Endymion would have passed across the mead
   Moonstruck with love, and this still Thames had heard
      Pan plash and paddle groping for some reed
   To lure from her blue cave that Naiad maid
   Who for such piping listens half in joy and half afraid.

   A moment more, the waking dove had cooed,
      The silver daughter of the silver sea
   With the fond gyves of clinging hands had wooed
      Her wanton from the chase, and Dryope
   Had thrust aside the branches of her oak
   To see the lusty gold-haired lad rein in his snorting yoke.

   A moment more, the trees had stooped to kiss
      Pale Daphne just awakening from the swoon
   Of tremulous laurels, lonely Salmacis
      Had bared his barren beauty to the moon,
   And through the vale with sad voluptuous smile
   Antinous had wandered, the red lotus of the Nile

   Down leaning from his black and clustering hair,
      To shade those slumberous eyelids’ caverned bliss,
   Or else on yonder grassy slope with bare
      High-tuniced limbs unravished Artemis
   Had bade her hounds give tongue, and roused the deer
   From his green ambuscade with shrill halloo and pricking spear.

   Lie still, lie still, O passionate heart, lie still!
      O Melancholy, fold thy raven wing!
   O sobbing Dryad, from thy hollow hill
      Come not with such despondent answering!
   No more thou wingèd Marsyas complain,
   Apollo loveth not to hear such troubled songs of pain!

   It was a dream, the glade is tenantless,
      No soft Ionian laughter moves the air,
   The Thames creeps on in sluggish leadenness,
      And from the copse left desolate and bare
   Fled is young Bacchus with his revelry,
   Yet still from Nuneham wood there comes that thrilling melody

   So sad, that one might think a human heart
      Brake in each separate note, a quality
   Which music sometimes has, being the Art
      Which is most nigh to tears and memory;
   Poor mourning Philomel, what dost thou fear?
   Thy sister doth not haunt these fields, Pandion is not here,

   Here is no cruel Lord with murderous blade,
      No woven web of bloody heraldries,
   But mossy dells for roving comrades made,
      Warm valleys where the tired student lies
   With half-shut book, and many a winding walk
   Where rustic lovers stray at eve in happy simple talk.

   The harmless rabbit gambols with its young
      Across the trampled towing-path, where late
   A troop of laughing boys in jostling throng
      Cheered with their noisy cries the racing eight;
   The gossamer, with ravelled silver threads,
   Works at its little loom, and from the dusky red-eaved sheds

   Of the lone Farm a flickering light shines out
      Where the swinked shepherd drives his bleating flock
   Back to their wattled sheep-cotes, a faint shout
      Comes from some Oxford boat at Sandford lock,
   And starts the moor-hen from the sedgy rill,
   And the dim lengthening shadows flit like swallows up the hill.

   The heron passes homeward to the mere,
      The blue mist creeps among the shivering trees,
   Gold world by world the silent stars appear,
      And like a blossom blown before the breeze
   A white moon drifts across the shimmering sky,
   Mute arbitress of all thy sad, thy rapturous threnody.

   She does not heed thee, wherefore should she heed,
      She knows Endymion is not far away;
   ’Tis I, ’tis I, whose soul is as the reed
      Which has no message of its own to play,
   So pipes another’s bidding, it is I,
   Drifting with every wind on the wide sea of misery.

   Ah! the brown bird has ceased: one exquisite trill
      About the sombre woodland seems to cling
   Dying in music, else the air is still,
      So still that one might hear the bat’s small wing
   Wander and wheel above the pines, or tell
   Each tiny dew-drop dripping from the bluebell’s brimming cell.

   And far away across the lengthening wold,
      Across the willowy flats and thickets brown,
   Magdalen’s tall tower tipped with tremulous gold
      Marks the long High Street of the little town,
   And warns me to return; I must not wait,
   Hark! ’t is the curfew booming from the bell at Christ Church gate.



WIND FLOWERS


IMPRESSION DU MATIN


   THE Thames nocturne of blue and gold
      Changed to a Harmony in grey:
      A barge with ochre-coloured hay
   Dropt from the wharf: and chill and cold

   The yellow fog came creeping down
      The bridges, till the houses’ walls
      Seemed changed to shadows and St. Paul’s
   Loomed like a bubble o’er the town.

   Then suddenly arose the clang
      Of waking life; the streets were stirred
      With country waggons: and a bird
   Flew to the glistening roofs and sang.

   But one pale woman all alone,
      The daylight kissing her wan hair,
      Loitered beneath the gas lamps’ flare,
   With lips of flame and heart of stone.


MAGDALEN WALKS


   THE little white clouds are racing over the sky,
      And the fields are strewn with the gold of the flower of March,
      The daffodil breaks under foot, and the tasselled larch
   Sways and swings as the thrush goes hurrying by.

   A delicate odour is borne on the wings of the morning breeze,
      The odour of deep wet grass, and of brown new-furrowed earth,
      The birds are singing for joy of the Spring’s glad birth,
   Hopping from branch to branch on the rocking trees.

   And all the woods are alive with the murmur and sound of Spring,
      And the rose-bud breaks into pink on the climbing briar,
      And the crocus-bed is a quivering moon of fire
   Girdled round with the belt of an amethyst ring.

   And the plane to the pine-tree is whispering some tale of love
      Till it rustles with laughter and tosses its mantle of green,
      And the gloom of the wych-elm’s hollow is lit with the iris sheen
   Of the burnished rainbow throat and the silver breast of a dove.

   See! the lark starts up from his bed in the meadow there,
      Breaking the gossamer threads and the nets of dew,
      And flashing adown the river, a flame of blue!
   The kingfisher flies like an arrow, and wounds the air.


ATHANASIA


   TO that gaunt House of Art which lacks for naught
      Of all the great things men have saved from Time,
   The withered body of a girl was brought
      Dead ere the world’s glad youth had touched its prime,
   And seen by lonely Arabs lying hid
   In the dim womb of some black pyramid.

   But when they had unloosed the linen band
      Which swathed the Egyptian’s body,—lo! was found
   Closed in the wasted hollow of her hand
      A little seed, which sown in English ground
   Did wondrous snow of starry blossoms bear
   And spread rich odours through our spring-tide air.

   With such strange arts this flower did allure
      That all forgotten was the asphodel,
   And the brown bee, the lily’s paramour,
      Forsook the cup where he was wont to dwell,
   For not a thing of earth it seemed to be,
   But stolen from some heavenly Arcady.

   In vain the sad narcissus, wan and white
      At its own beauty, hung across the stream,
   The purple dragon-fly had no delight
      With its gold dust to make his wings a-gleam,
   Ah! no delight the jasmine-bloom to kiss,
   Or brush the rain-pearls from the eucharis.

   For love of it the passionate nightingale
      Forgot the hills of Thrace, the cruel king,
   And the pale dove no longer cared to sail
      Through the wet woods at time of blossoming,
   But round this flower of Egypt sought to float,
   With silvered wing and amethystine throat.

   While the hot sun blazed in his tower of blue
      A cooling wind crept from the land of snows,
   And the warm south with tender tears of dew
      Drenched its white leaves when Hesperos up-rose
   Amid those sea-green meadows of the sky
   On which the scarlet bars of sunset lie.

   But when o’er wastes of lily-haunted field
      The tired birds had stayed their amorous tune,
   And broad and glittering like an argent shield
      High in the sapphire heavens hung the moon,
   Did no strange dream or evil memory make
   Each tremulous petal of its blossoms shake?

   Ah no! to this bright flower a thousand years
      Seemed but the lingering of a summer’s day,
   It never knew the tide of cankering fears
      Which turn a boy’s gold hair to withered grey,
   The dread desire of death it never knew,
   Or how all folk that they were born must rue.

   For we to death with pipe and dancing go,
      Nor would we pass the ivory gate again,
   As some sad river wearied of its flow
      Through the dull plains, the haunts of common men,
   Leaps lover-like into the terrible sea!
   And counts it gain to die so gloriously.

   We mar our lordly strength in barren strife
      With the world’s legions led by clamorous care,
   It never feels decay but gathers life
      From the pure sunlight and the supreme air,
   We live beneath Time’s wasting sovereignty,
   It is the child of all eternity.


SERENADE


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   THE western wind is blowing fair
      Across the dark Ægean sea,
   And at the secret marble stair
      My Tyrian galley waits for thee.
   Come down! the purple sail is spread,
      The watchman sleeps within the town,
   O leave thy lily-flowered bed,
      O Lady mine come down, come down!

   She will not come, I know her well,
      Of lover’s vows she hath no care,
   And little good a man can tell
      Of one so cruel and so fair.
   True love is but a woman’s toy,
      They never know the lover’s pain,
   And I who loved as loves a boy
      Must love in vain, must love in vain.

   O noble pilot, tell me true,
      Is that the sheen of golden hair?
   Or is it but the tangled dew
      That binds the passion-flowers there?
   Good sailor come and tell me now
      Is that my Lady’s lily hand?
   Or is it but the gleaming prow,
      Or is it but the silver sand?

   No! no! ’tis not the tangled dew,
      ’Tis not the silver-fretted sand,
   It is my own dear Lady true
      With golden hair and lily hand!
   O noble pilot, steer for Troy,
      Good sailor, ply the labouring oar,
   This is the Queen of life and joy
      Whom we must bear from Grecian shore!

   The waning sky grows faint and blue,
      It wants an hour still of day,
   Aboard! aboard! my gallant crew,
      O Lady mine, away! away!
   O noble pilot, steer for Troy,
      Good sailor, ply the labouring oar,
   O loved as only loves a boy!
      O loved for ever evermore!


ENDYMION


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   THE apple trees are hung with gold,
      And birds are loud in Arcady,
   The sheep lie bleating in the fold,
   The wild goat runs across the wold,
   But yesterday his love he told,
      I know he will come back to me.
   O rising moon!  O Lady moon!
      Be you my lover’s sentinel,
      You cannot choose but know him well,
   For he is shod with purple shoon,
   You cannot choose but know my love,
      For he a shepherd’s crook doth bear,
   And he is soft as any dove,
      And brown and curly is his hair.

   The turtle now has ceased to call
      Upon her crimson-footed groom,
   The grey wolf prowls about the stall,
   The lily’s singing seneschal
   Sleeps in the lily-bell, and all
      The violet hills are lost in gloom.
   O risen moon!  O holy moon!
      Stand on the top of Helice,
      And if my own true love you see,
   Ah! if you see the purple shoon,
   The hazel crook, the lad’s brown hair,
      The goat-skin wrapped about his arm,
   Tell him that I am waiting where
      The rushlight glimmers in the Farm.

   The falling dew is cold and chill,
      And no bird sings in Arcady,
   The little fauns have left the hill,
   Even the tired daffodil
   Has closed its gilded doors, and still
      My lover comes not back to me.
   False moon!  False moon!  O waning moon!
      Where is my own true lover gone,
      Where are the lips vermilion,
   The shepherd’s crook, the purple shoon?
   Why spread that silver pavilion,
      Why wear that veil of drifting mist?
   Ah! thou hast young Endymion,
      Thou hast the lips that should be kissed!


LA BELLA DONNA DELLA MIA MENTE


   MY limbs are wasted with a flame,
      My feet are sore with travelling,
   For, calling on my Lady’s name,
      My lips have now forgot to sing.

   O Linnet in the wild-rose brake
      Strain for my Love thy melody,
   O Lark sing louder for love’s sake,
      My gentle Lady passeth by.

   She is too fair for any man
      To see or hold his heart’s delight,
   Fairer than Queen or courtesan
      Or moonlit water in the night.

   Her hair is bound with myrtle leaves,
      (Green leaves upon her golden hair!)
   Green grasses through the yellow sheaves
      Of autumn corn are not more fair.

   Her little lips, more made to kiss
      Than to cry bitterly for pain,
   Are tremulous as brook-water is,
      Or roses after evening rain.

   Her neck is like white melilote
      Flushing for pleasure of the sun,
   The throbbing of the linnet’s throat
      Is not so sweet to look upon.

   As a pomegranate, cut in twain,
      White-seeded, is her crimson mouth,
   Her cheeks are as the fading stain
      Where the peach reddens to the south.

   O twining hands!  O delicate
      White body made for love and pain!
   O House of love!  O desolate
      Pale flower beaten by the rain!


CHANSON


   A RING of gold and a milk-white dove
      Are goodly gifts for thee,
   And a hempen rope for your own love
      To hang upon a tree.

   For you a House of Ivory,
      (Roses are white in the rose-bower)!
   A narrow bed for me to lie,
      (White, O white, is the hemlock flower)!

   Myrtle and jessamine for you,
      (O the red rose is fair to see)!
   For me the cypress and the rue,
      (Finest of all is rosemary)!

   For you three lovers of your hand,
      (Green grass where a man lies dead)!
   For me three paces on the sand,
      (Plant lilies at my head)!



CHARMIDES


                                     I.

   HE was a Grecian lad, who coming home
      With pulpy figs and wine from Sicily
   Stood at his galley’s prow, and let the foam
      Blow through his crisp brown curls unconsciously,
   And holding wave and wind in boy’s despite
   Peered from his dripping seat across the wet and stormy night.

   Till with the dawn he saw a burnished spear
      Like a thin thread of gold against the sky,
   And hoisted sail, and strained the creaking gear,
      And bade the pilot head her lustily
   Against the nor’west gale, and all day long
   Held on his way, and marked the rowers’ time with measured song.

   And when the faint Corinthian hills were red
      Dropped anchor in a little sandy bay,
   And with fresh boughs of olive crowned his head,
      And brushed from cheek and throat the hoary spray,
   And washed his limbs with oil, and from the hold
   Brought out his linen tunic and his sandals brazen-soled,

   And a rich robe stained with the fishers’ juice
      Which of some swarthy trader he had bought
   Upon the sunny quay at Syracuse,
      And was with Tyrian broideries inwrought,
   And by the questioning merchants made his way
   Up through the soft and silver woods, and when the labouring day

   Had spun its tangled web of crimson cloud,
      Clomb the high hill, and with swift silent feet
   Crept to the fane unnoticed by the crowd
      Of busy priests, and from some dark retreat
   Watched the young swains his frolic playmates bring
   The firstling of their little flock, and the shy shepherd fling

   The crackling salt upon the flame, or hang
      His studded crook against the temple wall
   To Her who keeps away the ravenous fang
      Of the base wolf from homestead and from stall;
   And then the clear-voiced maidens ’gan to sing,
   And to the altar each man brought some goodly offering,

   A beechen cup brimming with milky foam,
      A fair cloth wrought with cunning imagery
   Of hounds in chase, a waxen honey-comb
      Dripping with oozy gold which scarce the bee
   Had ceased from building, a black skin of oil
   Meet for the wrestlers, a great boar the fierce and white-tusked spoil

   Stolen from Artemis that jealous maid
      To please Athena, and the dappled hide
   Of a tall stag who in some mountain glade
      Had met the shaft; and then the herald cried,
   And from the pillared precinct one by one
   Went the glad Greeks well pleased that they their simple vows had
   done.

   And the old priest put out the waning fires
      Save that one lamp whose restless ruby glowed
   For ever in the cell, and the shrill lyres
      Came fainter on the wind, as down the road
   In joyous dance these country folk did pass,
   And with stout hands the warder closed the gates of polished brass.

   Long time he lay and hardly dared to breathe,
      And heard the cadenced drip of spilt-out wine,
   And the rose-petals falling from the wreath
      As the night breezes wandered through the shrine,
   And seemed to be in some entrancèd swoon
   Till through the open roof above the full and brimming moon

   Flooded with sheeny waves the marble floor,
      When from his nook up leapt the venturous lad,
   And flinging wide the cedar-carven door
      Beheld an awful image saffron-clad
   And armed for battle! the gaunt Griffin glared
   From the huge helm, and the long lance of wreck and ruin flared

   Like a red rod of flame, stony and steeled
      The Gorgon’s head its leaden eyeballs rolled,
   And writhed its snaky horrors through the shield,
      And gaped aghast with bloodless lips and cold
   In passion impotent, while with blind gaze
   The blinking owl between the feet hooted in shrill amaze.

   The lonely fisher as he trimmed his lamp
      Far out at sea off Sunium, or cast
   The net for tunnies, heard a brazen tramp
      Of horses smite the waves, and a wild blast
   Divide the folded curtains of the night,
   And knelt upon the little poop, and prayed in holy fright.

   And guilty lovers in their venery
      Forgat a little while their stolen sweets,
   Deeming they heard dread Dian’s bitter cry;
      And the grim watchmen on their lofty seats
   Ran to their shields in haste precipitate,
   Or strained black-bearded throats across the dusky parapet.

   For round the temple rolled the clang of arms,
      And the twelve Gods leapt up in marble fear,
   And the air quaked with dissonant alarums
      Till huge Poseidon shook his mighty spear,
   And on the frieze the prancing horses neighed,
   And the low tread of hurrying feet rang from the cavalcade.

   Ready for death with parted lips he stood,
      And well content at such a price to see
   That calm wide brow, that terrible maidenhood,
      The marvel of that pitiless chastity,
   Ah! well content indeed, for never wight
   Since Troy’s young shepherd prince had seen so wonderful a sight.

   Ready for death he stood, but lo! the air
      Grew silent, and the horses ceased to neigh,
   And off his brow he tossed the clustering hair,
      And from his limbs he throw the cloak away;
   For whom would not such love make desperate?
   And nigher came, and touched her throat, and with hands violate

   Undid the cuirass, and the crocus gown,
      And bared the breasts of polished ivory,
   Till from the waist the peplos falling down
      Left visible the secret mystery
   Which to no lover will Athena show,
   The grand cool flanks, the crescent thighs, the bossy hills of snow.

   Those who have never known a lover’s sin
      Let them not read my ditty, it will be
   To their dull ears so musicless and thin
      That they will have no joy of it, but ye
   To whose wan cheeks now creeps the lingering smile,
   Ye who have learned who Eros is,—O listen yet awhile.

   A little space he let his greedy eyes
      Rest on the burnished image, till mere sight
   Half swooned for surfeit of such luxuries,
      And then his lips in hungering delight
   Fed on her lips, and round the towered neck
   He flung his arms, nor cared at all his passion’s will to check.

   Never I ween did lover hold such tryst,
      For all night long he murmured honeyed word,
   And saw her sweet unravished limbs, and kissed
      Her pale and argent body undisturbed,
   And paddled with the polished throat, and pressed
   His hot and beating heart upon her chill and icy breast.

   It was as if Numidian javelins
      Pierced through and through his wild and whirling brain,
   And his nerves thrilled like throbbing violins
      In exquisite pulsation, and the pain
   Was such sweet anguish that he never drew
   His lips from hers till overhead the lark of warning flew.

   They who have never seen the daylight peer
      Into a darkened room, and drawn the curtain,
   And with dull eyes and wearied from some dear
      And worshipped body risen, they for certain
   Will never know of what I try to sing,
   How long the last kiss was, how fond and late his lingering.

   The moon was girdled with a crystal rim,
      The sign which shipmen say is ominous
   Of wrath in heaven, the wan stars were dim,
      And the low lightening east was tremulous
   With the faint fluttering wings of flying dawn,
   Ere from the silent sombre shrine his lover had withdrawn.

   Down the steep rock with hurried feet and fast
      Clomb the brave lad, and reached the cave of Pan,
   And heard the goat-foot snoring as he passed,
      And leapt upon a grassy knoll and ran
   Like a young fawn unto an olive wood
   Which in a shady valley by the well-built city stood;

   And sought a little stream, which well he knew,
      For oftentimes with boyish careless shout
   The green and crested grebe he would pursue,
      Or snare in woven net the silver trout,
   And down amid the startled reeds he lay
   Panting in breathless sweet affright, and waited for the day.

   On the green bank he lay, and let one hand
      Dip in the cool dark eddies listlessly,
   And soon the breath of morning came and fanned
      His hot flushed cheeks, or lifted wantonly
   The tangled curls from off his forehead, while
   He on the running water gazed with strange and secret smile.

   And soon the shepherd in rough woollen cloak
      With his long crook undid the wattled cotes,
   And from the stack a thin blue wreath of smoke
      Curled through the air across the ripening oats,
   And on the hill the yellow house-dog bayed
   As through the crisp and rustling fern the heavy cattle strayed.

   And when the light-foot mower went afield
      Across the meadows laced with threaded dew,
   And the sheep bleated on the misty weald,
      And from its nest the waking corncrake flew,
   Some woodmen saw him lying by the stream
   And marvelled much that any lad so beautiful could seem,

   Nor deemed him born of mortals, and one said,
      ‘It is young Hylas, that false runaway
   Who with a Naiad now would make his bed
      Forgetting Herakles,’ but others, ‘Nay,
   It is Narcissus, his own paramour,
   Those are the fond and crimson lips no woman can allure.’

   And when they nearer came a third one cried,
      ‘It is young Dionysos who has hid
   His spear and fawnskin by the river side
      Weary of hunting with the Bassarid,
   And wise indeed were we away to fly:
   They live not long who on the gods immortal come to spy.’

   So turned they back, and feared to look behind,
      And told the timid swain how they had seen
   Amid the reeds some woodland god reclined,
      And no man dared to cross the open green,
   And on that day no olive-tree was slain,
   Nor rushes cut, but all deserted was the fair domain,

   Save when the neat-herd’s lad, his empty pail
      Well slung upon his back, with leap and bound
   Raced on the other side, and stopped to hail,
      Hoping that he some comrade new had found,
   And gat no answer, and then half afraid
   Passed on his simple way, or down the still and silent glade

   A little girl ran laughing from the farm,
      Not thinking of love’s secret mysteries,
   And when she saw the white and gleaming arm
      And all his manlihood, with longing eyes
   Whose passion mocked her sweet virginity
   Watched him awhile, and then stole back sadly and wearily.

   Far off he heard the city’s hum and noise,
      And now and then the shriller laughter where
   The passionate purity of brown-limbed boys
      Wrestled or raced in the clear healthful air,
   And now and then a little tinkling bell
   As the shorn wether led the sheep down to the mossy well.

   Through the grey willows danced the fretful gnat,
      The grasshopper chirped idly from the tree,
   In sleek and oily coat the water-rat
      Breasting the little ripples manfully
   Made for the wild-duck’s nest, from bough to bough
   Hopped the shy finch, and the huge tortoise crept across the slough.

   On the faint wind floated the silky seeds
      As the bright scythe swept through the waving grass,
   The ouzel-cock splashed circles in the reeds
      And flecked with silver whorls the forest’s glass,
   Which scarce had caught again its imagery
   Ere from its bed the dusky tench leapt at the dragon-fly.

   But little care had he for any thing
      Though up and down the beech the squirrel played,
   And from the copse the linnet ’gan to sing
      To its brown mate its sweetest serenade;
   Ah! little care indeed, for he had seen
   The breasts of Pallas and the naked wonder of the Queen.

   But when the herdsman called his straggling goats
      With whistling pipe across the rocky road,
   And the shard-beetle with its trumpet-notes
      Boomed through the darkening woods, and seemed to bode
   Of coming storm, and the belated crane
   Passed homeward like a shadow, and the dull big drops of rain

   Fell on the pattering fig-leaves, up he rose,
      And from the gloomy forest went his way
   Past sombre homestead and wet orchard-close,
      And came at last unto a little quay,
   And called his mates aboard, and took his seat
   On the high poop, and pushed from land, and loosed the dripping sheet,

   And steered across the bay, and when nine suns
      Passed down the long and laddered way of gold,
   And nine pale moons had breathed their orisons
      To the chaste stars their confessors, or told
   Their dearest secret to the downy moth
   That will not fly at noonday, through the foam and surging froth

   Came a great owl with yellow sulphurous eyes
      And lit upon the ship, whose timbers creaked
   As though the lading of three argosies
      Were in the hold, and flapped its wings and shrieked,
   And darkness straightway stole across the deep,
   Sheathed was Orion’s sword, dread Mars himself fled down the steep,

   And the moon hid behind a tawny mask
      Of drifting cloud, and from the ocean’s marge
   Rose the red plume, the huge and hornèd casque,
      The seven-cubit spear, the brazen targe!
   And clad in bright and burnished panoply
   Athena strode across the stretch of sick and shivering sea!

   To the dull sailors’ sight her loosened looks
      Seemed like the jagged storm-rack, and her feet
   Only the spume that floats on hidden rocks,
      And, marking how the rising waters beat
   Against the rolling ship, the pilot cried
   To the young helmsman at the stern to luff to windward side

   But he, the overbold adulterer,
      A dear profaner of great mysteries,
   An ardent amorous idolater,
      When he beheld those grand relentless eyes
   Laughed loud for joy, and crying out ‘I come’
   Leapt from the lofty poop into the chill and churning foam.

   Then fell from the high heaven one bright star,
      One dancer left the circling galaxy,
   And back to Athens on her clattering car
      In all the pride of venged divinity
   Pale Pallas swept with shrill and steely clank,
   And a few gurgling bubbles rose where her boy lover sank.

   And the mast shuddered as the gaunt owl flew
      With mocking hoots after the wrathful Queen,
   And the old pilot bade the trembling crew
      Hoist the big sail, and told how he had seen
   Close to the stern a dim and giant form,
   And like a dipping swallow the stout ship dashed through the storm.

   And no man dared to speak of Charmides
      Deeming that he some evil thing had wrought,
   And when they reached the strait Symplegades
      They beached their galley on the shore, and sought
   The toll-gate of the city hastily,
   And in the market showed their brown and pictured pottery.

                                     II.

   BUT some good Triton-god had ruth, and bare
      The boy’s drowned body back to Grecian land,
   And mermaids combed his dank and dripping hair
      And smoothed his brow, and loosed his clenching hand;
   Some brought sweet spices from far Araby,
   And others bade the halcyon sing her softest lullaby.

   And when he neared his old Athenian home,
      A mighty billow rose up suddenly
   Upon whose oily back the clotted foam
      Lay diapered in some strange fantasy,
   And clasping him unto its glassy breast
   Swept landward, like a white-maned steed upon a venturous quest!

   Now where Colonos leans unto the sea
      There lies a long and level stretch of lawn;
   The rabbit knows it, and the mountain bee
      For it deserts Hymettus, and the Faun
   Is not afraid, for never through the day
   Comes a cry ruder than the shout of shepherd lads at play.

   But often from the thorny labyrinth
      And tangled branches of the circling wood
   The stealthy hunter sees young Hyacinth
      Hurling the polished disk, and draws his hood
   Over his guilty gaze, and creeps away,
   Nor dares to wind his horn, or—else at the first break of day

   The Dryads come and throw the leathern ball
      Along the reedy shore, and circumvent
   Some goat-eared Pan to be their seneschal
      For fear of bold Poseidon’s ravishment,
   And loose their girdles, with shy timorous eyes,
   Lest from the surf his azure arms and purple beard should rise.

   On this side and on that a rocky cave,
      Hung with the yellow-belled laburnum, stands
   Smooth is the beach, save where some ebbing wave
      Leaves its faint outline etched upon the sands,
   As though it feared to be too soon forgot
   By the green rush, its playfellow,—and yet, it is a spot

   So small, that the inconstant butterfly
      Could steal the hoarded money from each flower
   Ere it was noon, and still not satisfy
      Its over-greedy love,—within an hour
   A sailor boy, were he but rude enow
   To land and pluck a garland for his galley’s painted prow,

   Would almost leave the little meadow bare,
      For it knows nothing of great pageantry,
   Only a few narcissi here and there
      Stand separate in sweet austerity,
   Dotting the unmown grass with silver stars,
   And here and there a daffodil waves tiny scimitars.

   Hither the billow brought him, and was glad
      Of such dear servitude, and where the land
   Was virgin of all waters laid the lad
      Upon the golden margent of the strand,
   And like a lingering lover oft returned
   To kiss those pallid limbs which once with intense fire burned,

   Ere the wet seas had quenched that holocaust,
      That self-fed flame, that passionate lustihead,
   Ere grisly death with chill and nipping frost
      Had withered up those lilies white and red
   Which, while the boy would through the forest range,
   Answered each other in a sweet antiphonal counter-change.

   And when at dawn the wood-nymphs, hand-in-hand,
      Threaded the bosky dell, their satyr spied
   The boy’s pale body stretched upon the sand,
      And feared Poseidon’s treachery, and cried,
   And like bright sunbeams flitting through a glade
   Each startled Dryad sought some safe and leafy ambuscade.

   Save one white girl, who deemed it would not be
      So dread a thing to feel a sea-god’s arms
   Crushing her breasts in amorous tyranny,
      And longed to listen to those subtle charms
   Insidious lovers weave when they would win
   Some fencèd fortress, and stole back again, nor thought it sin

   To yield her treasure unto one so fair,
      And lay beside him, thirsty with love’s drouth,
   Called him soft names, played with his tangled hair,
      And with hot lips made havoc of his mouth
   Afraid he might not wake, and then afraid
   Lest he might wake too soon, fled back, and then, fond renegade,

   Returned to fresh assault, and all day long
      Sat at his side, and laughed at her new toy,
   And held his hand, and sang her sweetest song,
      Then frowned to see how froward was the boy
   Who would not with her maidenhood entwine,
   Nor knew that three days since his eyes had looked on Proserpine;

   Nor knew what sacrilege his lips had done,
      But said, ‘He will awake, I know him well,
   He will awake at evening when the sun
      Hangs his red shield on Corinth’s citadel;
   This sleep is but a cruel treachery
   To make me love him more, and in some cavern of the sea

   Deeper than ever falls the fisher’s line
      Already a huge Triton blows his horn,
   And weaves a garland from the crystalline
      And drifting ocean-tendrils to adorn
   The emerald pillars of our bridal bed,
   For sphered in foaming silver, and with coral crownèd head,

   We two will sit upon a throne of pearl,
      And a blue wave will be our canopy,
   And at our feet the water-snakes will curl
      In all their amethystine panoply
   Of diamonded mail, and we will mark
   The mullets swimming by the mast of some storm-foundered bark,

   Vermilion-finned with eyes of bossy gold
      Like flakes of crimson light, and the great deep
   His glassy-portaled chamber will unfold,
      And we will see the painted dolphins sleep
   Cradled by murmuring halcyons on the rocks
   Where Proteus in quaint suit of green pastures his monstrous flocks.

   And tremulous opal-hued anemones
      Will wave their purple fringes where we tread
   Upon the mirrored floor, and argosies
      Of fishes flecked with tawny scales will thread
   The drifting cordage of the shattered wreck,
   And honey-coloured amber beads our twining limbs will deck.’

   But when that baffled Lord of War the Sun
      With gaudy pennon flying passed away
   Into his brazen House, and one by one
      The little yellow stars began to stray
   Across the field of heaven, ah! then indeed
   She feared his lips upon her lips would never care to feed,

   And cried, ‘Awake, already the pale moon
      Washes the trees with silver, and the wave
   Creeps grey and chilly up this sandy dune,
      The croaking frogs are out, and from the cave
   The nightjar shrieks, the fluttering bats repass,
   And the brown stoat with hollow flanks creeps through the dusky grass.

   Nay, though thou art a god, be not so coy,
      For in yon stream there is a little reed
   That often whispers how a lovely boy
      Lay with her once upon a grassy mead,
   Who when his cruel pleasure he had done
   Spread wings of rustling gold and soared aloft into the sun.

   Be not so coy, the laurel trembles still
      With great Apollo’s kisses, and the fir
   Whose clustering sisters fringe the seaward hill
      Hath many a tale of that bold ravisher
   Whom men call Boreas, and I have seen
   The mocking eyes of Hermes through the poplar’s silvery sheen.

   Even the jealous Naiads call me fair,
      And every morn a young and ruddy swain
   Woos me with apples and with locks of hair,
      And seeks to soothe my virginal disdain
   By all the gifts the gentle wood-nymphs love;
   But yesterday he brought to me an iris-plumaged dove

   With little crimson feet, which with its store
      Of seven spotted eggs the cruel lad
   Had stolen from the lofty sycamore
      At daybreak, when her amorous comrade had
   Flown off in search of berried juniper
   Which most they love; the fretful wasp, that earliest vintager

   Of the blue grapes, hath not persistency
      So constant as this simple shepherd-boy
   For my poor lips, his joyous purity
      And laughing sunny eyes might well decoy
   A Dryad from her oath to Artemis;
   For very beautiful is he, his mouth was made to kiss;

   His argent forehead, like a rising moon
      Over the dusky hills of meeting brows,
   Is crescent shaped, the hot and Tyrian noon
      Leads from the myrtle-grove no goodlier spouse
   For Cytheræa, the first silky down
   Fringes his blushing cheeks, and his young limbs are strong and brown;

   And he is rich, and fat and fleecy herds
      Of bleating sheep upon his meadows lie,
   And many an earthen bowl of yellow curds
      Is in his homestead for the thievish fly
   To swim and drown in, the pink clover mead
   Keeps its sweet store for him, and he can pipe on oaten reed.

   And yet I love him not; it was for thee
      I kept my love; I knew that thou would’st come
   To rid me of this pallid chastity,
      Thou fairest flower of the flowerless foam
   Of all the wide Ægean, brightest star
   Of ocean’s azure heavens where the mirrored planets are!

   I knew that thou would’st come, for when at first
      The dry wood burgeoned, and the sap of spring
   Swelled in my green and tender bark or burst
      To myriad multitudinous blossoming
   Which mocked the midnight with its mimic moons
   That did not dread the dawn, and first the thrushes’ rapturous tunes

   Startled the squirrel from its granary,
      And cuckoo flowers fringed the narrow lane,
   Through my young leaves a sensuous ecstasy
      Crept like new wine, and every mossy vein
   Throbbed with the fitful pulse of amorous blood,
   And the wild winds of passion shook my slim stem’s maidenhood.

   The trooping fawns at evening came and laid
      Their cool black noses on my lowest boughs,
   And on my topmost branch the blackbird made
      A little nest of grasses for his spouse,
   And now and then a twittering wren would light
   On a thin twig which hardly bare the weight of such delight.

   I was the Attic shepherd’s trysting place,
      Beneath my shadow Amaryllis lay,
   And round my trunk would laughing Daphnis chase
      The timorous girl, till tired out with play
   She felt his hot breath stir her tangled hair,
   And turned, and looked, and fled no more from such delightful snare.

   Then come away unto my ambuscade
      Where clustering woodbine weaves a canopy
   For amorous pleasaunce, and the rustling shade
      Of Paphian myrtles seems to sanctify
   The dearest rites of love; there in the cool
   And green recesses of its farthest depth there is pool,

   The ouzel’s haunt, the wild bee’s pasturage,
      For round its rim great creamy lilies float
   Through their flat leaves in verdant anchorage,
      Each cup a white-sailed golden-laden boat
   Steered by a dragon-fly,—be not afraid
   To leave this wan and wave-kissed shore, surely the place was made

   For lovers such as we; the Cyprian Queen,
      One arm around her boyish paramour,
   Strays often there at eve, and I have seen
      The moon strip off her misty vestiture
   For young Endymion’s eyes; be not afraid,
   The panther feet of Dian never tread that secret glade.

   Nay if thou will’st, back to the beating brine,
      Back to the boisterous billow let us go,
   And walk all day beneath the hyaline
      Huge vault of Neptune’s watery portico,
   And watch the purple monsters of the deep
   Sport in ungainly play, and from his lair keen Xiphias leap.

   For if my mistress find me lying here
      She will not ruth or gentle pity show,
   But lay her boar-spear down, and with austere
      Relentless fingers string the cornel bow,
   And draw the feathered notch against her breast,
   And loose the archèd cord; aye, even now upon the quest

   I hear her hurrying feet,—awake, awake,
      Thou laggard in love’s battle! once at least
   Let me drink deep of passion’s wine, and slake
      My parchèd being with the nectarous feast
   Which even gods affect!  O come, Love, come,
   Still we have time to reach the cavern of thine azure home.’

   Scarce had she spoken when the shuddering trees
      Shook, and the leaves divided, and the air
   Grew conscious of a god, and the grey seas
      Crawled backward, and a long and dismal blare
   Blew from some tasselled horn, a sleuth-hound bayed,
   And like a flame a barbèd reed flew whizzing down the glade.

   And where the little flowers of her breast
      Just brake into their milky blossoming,
   This murderous paramour, this unbidden guest,
      Pierced and struck deep in horrid chambering,
   And ploughed a bloody furrow with its dart,
   And dug a long red road, and cleft with wingèd death her heart.

   Sobbing her life out with a bitter cry
      On the boy’s body fell the Dryad maid,
   Sobbing for incomplete virginity,
      And raptures unenjoyed, and pleasures dead,
   And all the pain of things unsatisfied,
   And the bright drops of crimson youth crept down her throbbing side.

   Ah! pitiful it was to hear her moan,
      And very pitiful to see her die
   Ere she had yielded up her sweets, or known
      The joy of passion, that dread mystery
   Which not to know is not to live at all,
   And yet to know is to be held in death’s most deadly thrall.

   But as it hapt the Queen of Cythere,
      Who with Adonis all night long had lain
   Within some shepherd’s hut in Arcady,
      On team of silver doves and gilded wain
   Was journeying Paphos-ward, high up afar
   From mortal ken between the mountains and the morning star,

   And when low down she spied the hapless pair,
      And heard the Oread’s faint despairing cry,
   Whose cadence seemed to play upon the air
      As though it were a viol, hastily
   She bade her pigeons fold each straining plume,
   And dropt to earth, and reached the strand, and saw their dolorous
   doom.

   For as a gardener turning back his head
      To catch the last notes of the linnet, mows
   With careless scythe too near some flower bed,
      And cuts the thorny pillar of the rose,
   And with the flower’s loosened loneliness
   Strews the brown mould; or as some shepherd lad in wantonness

   Driving his little flock along the mead
      Treads down two daffodils, which side by aide
   Have lured the lady-bird with yellow brede
      And made the gaudy moth forget its pride,
   Treads down their brimming golden chalices
   Under light feet which were not made for such rude ravages;

   Or as a schoolboy tired of his book
      Flings himself down upon the reedy grass
   And plucks two water-lilies from the brook,
      And for a time forgets the hour glass,
   Then wearies of their sweets, and goes his way,
   And lets the hot sun kill them, even go these lovers lay.

   And Venus cried, ‘It is dread Artemis
      Whose bitter hand hath wrought this cruelty,
   Or else that mightier maid whose care it is
      To guard her strong and stainless majesty
   Upon the hill Athenian,—alas!
   That they who loved so well unloved into Death’s house should pass.’

   So with soft hands she laid the boy and girl
      In the great golden waggon tenderly
   (Her white throat whiter than a moony pearl
      Just threaded with a blue vein’s tapestry
   Had not yet ceased to throb, and still her breast
   Swayed like a wind-stirred lily in ambiguous unrest)

   And then each pigeon spread its milky van,
      The bright car soared into the dawning sky,
   And like a cloud the aerial caravan
      Passed over the Ægean silently,
   Till the faint air was troubled with the song
   From the wan mouths that call on bleeding Thammuz all night long.

   But when the doves had reached their wonted goal
      Where the wide stair of orbèd marble dips
   Its snows into the sea, her fluttering soul
      Just shook the trembling petals of her lips
   And passed into the void, and Venus knew
   That one fair maid the less would walk amid her retinue,

   And bade her servants carve a cedar chest
      With all the wonder of this history,
   Within whose scented womb their limbs should rest
      Where olive-trees make tender the blue sky
   On the low hills of Paphos, and the Faun
   Pipes in the noonday, and the nightingale sings on till dawn.

   Nor failed they to obey her hest, and ere
      The morning bee had stung the daffodil
   With tiny fretful spear, or from its lair
      The waking stag had leapt across the rill
   And roused the ouzel, or the lizard crept
   Athwart the sunny rock, beneath the grass their bodies slept.

   And when day brake, within that silver shrine
      Fed by the flames of cressets tremulous,
   Queen Venus knelt and prayed to Proserpine
      That she whose beauty made Death amorous
   Should beg a guerdon from her pallid Lord,
   And let Desire pass across dread Charon’s icy ford.

                                     III

   IN melancholy moonless Acheron,
      Farm for the goodly earth and joyous day
   Where no spring ever buds, nor ripening sun
      Weighs down the apple trees, nor flowery May
   Chequers with chestnut blooms the grassy floor,
   Where thrushes never sing, and piping linnets mate no more,

   There by a dim and dark Lethæan well
      Young Charmides was lying; wearily
   He plucked the blossoms from the asphodel,
      And with its little rifled treasury
   Strewed the dull waters of the dusky stream,
   And watched the white stars founder, and the land was like a dream,

   When as he gazed into the watery glass
      And through his brown hair’s curly tangles scanned
   His own wan face, a shadow seemed to pass
      Across the mirror, and a little hand
   Stole into his, and warm lips timidly
   Brushed his pale cheeks, and breathed their secret forth into a sigh.

   Then turned he round his weary eyes and saw,
      And ever nigher still their faces came,
   And nigher ever did their young mouths draw
      Until they seemed one perfect rose of flame,
   And longing arms around her neck he cast,
   And felt her throbbing bosom, and his breath came hot and fast,

   And all his hoarded sweets were hers to kiss,
      And all her maidenhood was his to slay,
   And limb to limb in long and rapturous bliss
      Their passion waxed and waned,—O why essay
   To pipe again of love, too venturous reed!
   Enough, enough that Eros laughed upon that flowerless mead.

   Too venturous poesy, O why essay
      To pipe again of passion! fold thy wings
   O’er daring Icarus and bid thy lay
      Sleep hidden in the lyre’s silent strings
   Till thou hast found the old Castalian rill,
   Or from the Lesbian waters plucked drowned Sappho’s golden quid!

   Enough, enough that he whose life had been
      A fiery pulse of sin, a splendid shame,
   Could in the loveless land of Hades glean
      One scorching harvest from those fields of flame
   Where passion walks with naked unshod feet
   And is not wounded,—ah! enough that once their lips could meet

   In that wild throb when all existences
      Seemed narrowed to one single ecstasy
   Which dies through its own sweetness and the stress
      Of too much pleasure, ere Persephone
   Had bade them serve her by the ebon throne
   Of the pale God who in the fields of Enna loosed her zone.



FLOWERS OF GOLD


IMPRESSIONS

I
LES SILHOUETTES


      THE sea is flecked with bars of grey,
      The dull dead wind is out of tune,
      And like a withered leaf the moon
   Is blown across the stormy bay.

      Etched clear upon the pallid sand
      Lies the black boat: a sailor boy
      Clambers aboard in careless joy
   With laughing face and gleaming hand.

      And overhead the curlews cry,
      Where through the dusky upland grass
      The young brown-throated reapers pass,
   Like silhouettes against the sky.


II
LA FUITE DE LA LUNE


      TO outer senses there is peace,
      A dreamy peace on either hand
      Deep silence in the shadowy land,
   Deep silence where the shadows cease.

      Save for a cry that echoes shrill
      From some lone bird disconsolate;
      A corncrake calling to its mate;
   The answer from the misty hill.

      And suddenly the moon withdraws
      Her sickle from the lightening skies,
      And to her sombre cavern flies,
   Wrapped in a veil of yellow gauze.


THE GRAVE OF KEATS


   RID of the world’s injustice, and his pain,
      He rests at last beneath God’s veil of blue:
      Taken from life when life and love were new
   The youngest of the martyrs here is lain,
   Fair as Sebastian, and as early slain.
      No cypress shades his grave, no funeral yew,
      But gentle violets weeping with the dew
   Weave on his bones an ever-blossoming chain.
   O proudest heart that broke for misery!
      O sweetest lips since those of Mitylene!
      O poet-painter of our English Land!
   Thy name was writ in water—it shall stand:
      And tears like mine will keep thy memory green,
      As Isabella did her Basil-tree.

ROME.


THEOCRITUS


                               A VILLANELLE

   O SINGER of Persephone!
      In the dim meadows desolate
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Still through the ivy flits the bee
      Where Amaryllis lies in state;
   O Singer of Persephone!

   Simætha calls on Hecate
      And hears the wild dogs at the gate;
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Still by the light and laughing sea
      Poor Polypheme bemoans his fate;
   O Singer of Persephone!

   And still in boyish rivalry
      Young Daphnis challenges his mate;
   Dost thou remember Sicily?

   Slim Lacon keeps a goat for thee,
      For thee the jocund shepherds wait;
   O Singer of Persephone!
   Dost thou remember Sicily?


IN THE GOLD ROOM


                                A HARMONY

   HER ivory hands on the ivory keys
      Strayed in a fitful fantasy,
   Like the silver gleam when the poplar trees
      Rustle their pale-leaves listlessly,
   Or the drifting foam of a restless sea
   When the waves show their teeth in the flying breeze.

   Her gold hair fell on the wall of gold
      Like the delicate gossamer tangles spun
   On the burnished disk of the marigold,
      Or the sunflower turning to meet the sun
      When the gloom of the dark blue night is done,
   And the spear of the lily is aureoled.

   And her sweet red lips on these lips of mine
      Burned like the ruby fire set
   In the swinging lamp of a crimson shrine,
      Or the bleeding wounds of the pomegranate,
      Or the heart of the lotus drenched and wet
   With the spilt-out blood of the rose-red wine.


BALLADE DE MARGUERITE


                                (NORMANDE)

   I AM weary of lying within the chase
   When the knights are meeting in market-place.

   Nay, go not thou to the red-roofed town
   Lest the hoofs of the war-horse tread thee down.

   But I would not go where the Squires ride,
   I would only walk by my Lady’s side.

   Alack! and alack! thou art overbold,
   A Forester’s son may not eat off gold.

   Will she love me the less that my Father is seen
   Each Martinmas day in a doublet green?

   Perchance she is sewing at tapestrie,
   Spindle and loom are not meet for thee.

   Ah, if she is working the arras bright
   I might ravel the threads by the fire-light.

   Perchance she is hunting of the deer,
   How could you follow o’er hill and mere?

   Ah, if she is riding with the court,
   I might run beside her and wind the morte.

   Perchance she is kneeling in St. Denys,
   (On her soul may our Lady have gramercy!)

   Ah, if she is praying in lone chapelle,
   I might swing the censer and ring the bell.

   Come in, my son, for you look sae pale,
   The father shall fill thee a stoup of ale.

   But who are these knights in bright array?
   Is it a pageant the rich folks play?

   ’T is the King of England from over sea,
   Who has come unto visit our fair countrie.

   But why does the curfew toll sae low?
   And why do the mourners walk a-row?

   O ’t is Hugh of Amiens my sister’s son
   Who is lying stark, for his day is done.

   Nay, nay, for I see white lilies clear,
   It is no strong man who lies on the bier.

   O ’t is old Dame Jeannette that kept the hall,
   I knew she would die at the autumn fall.

   Dame Jeannette had not that gold-brown hair,
   Old Jeannette was not a maiden fair.

   O ’t is none of our kith and none of our kin,
   (Her soul may our Lady assoil from sin!)

   But I hear the boy’s voice chaunting sweet,
   ‘Elle est morte, la Marguerite.’

   Come in, my son, and lie on the bed,
   And let the dead folk bury their dead.

   O mother, you know I loved her true:
   O mother, hath one grave room for two?


THE DOLE OF THE KING’S DAUGHTER


                                 (BRETON)

   SEVEN stars in the still water,
      And seven in the sky;
   Seven sins on the King’s daughter,
      Deep in her soul to lie.

   Red roses are at her feet,
      (Roses are red in her red-gold hair)
   And O where her bosom and girdle meet
      Red roses are hidden there.

   Fair is the knight who lieth slain
      Amid the rush and reed,
   See the lean fishes that are fain
      Upon dead men to feed.

   Sweet is the page that lieth there,
      (Cloth of gold is goodly prey,)
   See the black ravens in the air,
      Black, O black as the night are they.

   What do they there so stark and dead?
      (There is blood upon her hand)
   Why are the lilies flecked with red?
      (There is blood on the river sand.)

   There are two that ride from the south and east,
      And two from the north and west,
   For the black raven a goodly feast,
      For the King’s daughter rest.

   There is one man who loves her true,
      (Red, O red, is the stain of gore!)
   He hath duggen a grave by the darksome yew,
      (One grave will do for four.)

   No moon in the still heaven,
      In the black water none,
   The sins on her soul are seven,
      The sin upon his is one.


AMOR INTELLECTUALIS


   OFT have we trod the vales of Castaly
      And heard sweet notes of sylvan music blown
      From antique reeds to common folk unknown:
   And often launched our bark upon that sea
   Which the nine Muses hold in empery,
      And ploughed free furrows through the wave and foam,
      Nor spread reluctant sail for more safe home
   Till we had freighted well our argosy.
   Of which despoilèd treasures these remain,
      Sordello’s passion, and the honeyed line
   Of young Endymion, lordly Tamburlaine
      Driving his pampered jades, and more than these,
   The seven-fold vision of the Florentine,
      And grave-browed Milton’s solemn harmonies.


SANTA DECCA


   THE Gods are dead: no longer do we bring
      To grey-eyed Pallas crowns of olive-leaves!
      Demeter’s child no more hath tithe of sheaves,
   And in the noon the careless shepherds sing,
   For Pan is dead, and all the wantoning
      By secret glade and devious haunt is o’er:
      Young Hylas seeks the water-springs no more;
   Great Pan is dead, and Mary’s son is King.

   And yet—perchance in this sea-trancèd isle,
      Chewing the bitter fruit of memory,
      Some God lies hidden in the asphodel.
   Ah Love! if such there be, then it were well
      For us to fly his anger: nay, but see,
      The leaves are stirring: let us watch awhile.

CORFU.


A VISION


   TWO crownèd Kings, and One that stood alone
      With no green weight of laurels round his head,
      But with sad eyes as one uncomforted,
   And wearied with man’s never-ceasing moan
   For sins no bleating victim can atone,
      And sweet long lips with tears and kisses fed.
      Girt was he in a garment black and red,
   And at his feet I marked a broken stone
      Which sent up lilies, dove-like, to his knees.
   Now at their sight, my heart being lit with flame,
   I cried to Beatricé, ‘Who are these?’
   And she made answer, knowing well each name,
      ‘Æschylos first, the second Sophokles,
      And last (wide stream of tears!) Euripides.’


IMPRESSION DE VOYAGE


   THE sea was sapphire coloured, and the sky
      Burned like a heated opal through the air;
      We hoisted sail; the wind was blowing fair
   For the blue lands that to the eastward lie.
   From the steep prow I marked with quickening eye
      Zakynthos, every olive grove and creek,
      Ithaca’s cliff, Lycaon’s snowy peak,
   And all the flower-strewn hills of Arcady.
      The flapping of the sail against the mast,
      The ripple of the water on the side,
   The ripple of girls’ laughter at the stern,
   The only sounds:—when ’gan the West to burn,
      And a red sun upon the seas to ride,
      I stood upon the soil of Greece at last!

KATAKOLO.


THE GRAVE OF SHELLEY


   LIKE burnt-out torches by a sick man’s bed
      Gaunt cypress-trees stand round the sun-bleached stone;
      Here doth the little night-owl make her throne,
   And the slight lizard show his jewelled head.
   And, where the chaliced poppies flame to red,
      In the still chamber of yon pyramid
      Surely some Old-World Sphinx lurks darkly hid,
   Grim warder of this pleasaunce of the dead.

   Ah! sweet indeed to rest within the womb
      Of Earth, great mother of eternal sleep,
   But sweeter far for thee a restless tomb
      In the blue cavern of an echoing deep,
   Or where the tall ships founder in the gloom
      Against the rocks of some wave-shattered steep.

ROME.


BY THE ARNO


      THE oleander on the wall
      Grows crimson in the dawning light,
      Though the grey shadows of the night
   Lie yet on Florence like a pall.

      The dew is bright upon the hill,
      And bright the blossoms overhead,
      But ah! the grasshoppers have fled,
   The little Attic song is still.

      Only the leaves are gently stirred
      By the soft breathing of the gale,
      And in the almond-scented vale
   The lonely nightingale is heard.

      The day will make thee silent soon,
      O nightingale sing on for love!
      While yet upon the shadowy grove
   Splinter the arrows of the moon.

      Before across the silent lawn
      In sea-green vest the morning steals,
      And to love’s frightened eyes reveals
   The long white fingers of the dawn

      Fast climbing up the eastern sky
      To grasp and slay the shuddering night,
      All careless of my heart’s delight,
   Or if the nightingale should die.



IMPRESSIONS DE THÉÂTRE


FABIEN DEI FRANCHI


                        TO MY FRIEND HENRY IRVING

   THE silent room, the heavy creeping shade,
      The dead that travel fast, the opening door,
      The murdered brother rising through the floor,
   The ghost’s white fingers on thy shoulders laid,
   And then the lonely duel in the glade,
      The broken swords, the stifled scream, the gore,
      Thy grand revengeful eyes when all is o’er,—
   These things are well enough,—but thou wert made
      For more august creation! frenzied Lear
      Should at thy bidding wander on the heath
      With the shrill fool to mock him, Romeo
   For thee should lure his love, and desperate fear
   Pluck Richard’s recreant dagger from its sheath—
   Thou trumpet set for Shakespeare’s lips to blow!


PHÈDRE


                            TO SARAH BERNHARDT

   HOW vain and dull this common world must seem
      To such a One as thou, who should’st have talked
   At Florence with Mirandola, or walked
   Through the cool olives of the Academe:
   Thou should’st have gathered reeds from a green stream
      For Goat-foot Pan’s shrill piping, and have played
      With the white girls in that Phæacian glade
   Where grave Odysseus wakened from his dream.

   Ah! surely once some urn of Attic clay
      Held thy wan dust, and thou hast come again
      Back to this common world so dull and vain,
   For thou wert weary of the sunless day,
      The heavy fields of scentless asphodel,
      The loveless lips with which men kiss in Hell.


WRITTEN AT THE LYCEUM THEATRE

I
PORTIA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   I MARVEL not Bassanio was so bold
      To peril all he had upon the lead,
      Or that proud Aragon bent low his head
   Or that Morocco’s fiery heart grew cold:
   For in that gorgeous dress of beaten gold
      Which is more golden than the golden sun
      No woman Veronesé looked upon
   Was half so fair as thou whom I behold.
   Yet fairer when with wisdom as your shield
      The sober-suited lawyer’s gown you donned,
   And would not let the laws of Venice yield
      Antonio’s heart to that accursèd Jew—
      O Portia! take my heart: it is thy due:
   I think I will not quarrel with the Bond.


II
QUEEN HENRIETTA MARIA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   IN the lone tent, waiting for victory,
      She stands with eyes marred by the mists of pain,
      Like some wan lily overdrenched with rain:
   The clamorous clang of arms, the ensanguined sky,
   War’s ruin, and the wreck of chivalry
      To her proud soul no common fear can bring:
      Bravely she tarrieth for her Lord the King,
   Her soul a-flame with passionate ecstasy.
   O Hair of Gold!  O Crimson Lips!  O Face
      Made for the luring and the love of man!
      With thee I do forget the toil and stress,
   The loveless road that knows no resting place,
      Time’s straitened pulse, the soul’s dread weariness,
      My freedom, and my life republican!


III
CAMMA


                              TO ELLEN TERRY

   AS one who poring on a Grecian urn
      Scans the fair shapes some Attic hand hath made,
      God with slim goddess, goodly man with maid,
   And for their beauty’s sake is loth to turn
   And face the obvious day, must I not yearn
      For many a secret moon of indolent bliss,
      When in midmost shrine of Artemis
   I see thee standing, antique-limbed, and stern?

   And yet—methinks I’d rather see thee play
      That serpent of old Nile, whose witchery
   Made Emperors drunken,—come, great Egypt, shake
      Our stage with all thy mimic pageants!  Nay,
      I am grown sick of unreal passions, make
   The world thine Actium, me thine Anthony!



PANTHEA


   NAY, let us walk from fire unto fire,
      From passionate pain to deadlier delight,—
   I am too young to live without desire,
      Too young art thou to waste this summer night
   Asking those idle questions which of old
   Man sought of seer and oracle, and no reply was told.

   For, sweet, to feel is better than to know,
      And wisdom is a childless heritage,
   One pulse of passion—youth’s first fiery glow,—
      Are worth the hoarded proverbs of the sage:
   Vex not thy soul with dead philosophy,
   Have we not lips to kiss with, hearts to love and eyes to see!

   Dost thou not hear the murmuring nightingale,
      Like water bubbling from a silver jar,
   So soft she sings the envious moon is pale,
      That high in heaven she is hung so far
   She cannot hear that love-enraptured tune,—
   Mark how she wreathes each horn with mist, yon late and labouring
   moon.

   White lilies, in whose cups the gold bees dream,
      The fallen snow of petals where the breeze
   Scatters the chestnut blossom, or the gleam
      Of boyish limbs in water,—are not these
   Enough for thee, dost thou desire more?
   Alas! the Gods will give nought else from their eternal store.

   For our high Gods have sick and wearied grown
      Of all our endless sins, our vain endeavour
   For wasted days of youth to make atone
      By pain or prayer or priest, and never, never,
   Hearken they now to either good or ill,
   But send their rain upon the just and the unjust at will.

   They sit at ease, our Gods they sit at ease,
      Strewing with leaves of rose their scented wine,
   They sleep, they sleep, beneath the rocking trees
      Where asphodel and yellow lotus twine,
   Mourning the old glad days before they knew
   What evil things the heart of man could dream, and dreaming do.

   And far beneath the brazen floor they see
      Like swarming flies the crowd of little men,
   The bustle of small lives, then wearily
      Back to their lotus-haunts they turn again
   Kissing each others’ mouths, and mix more deep
   The poppy-seeded draught which brings soft purple-lidded sleep.

   There all day long the golden-vestured sun,
      Their torch-bearer, stands with his torch ablaze,
   And, when the gaudy web of noon is spun
      By its twelve maidens, through the crimson haze
   Fresh from Endymion’s arms comes forth the moon,
   And the immortal Gods in toils of mortal passions swoon.

   There walks Queen Juno through some dewy mead,
      Her grand white feet flecked with the saffron dust
   Of wind-stirred lilies, while young Ganymede
      Leaps in the hot and amber-foaming must,
   His curls all tossed, as when the eagle bare
   The frightened boy from Ida through the blue Ionian air.

   There in the green heart of some garden close
      Queen Venus with the shepherd at her side,
   Her warm soft body like the briar rose
      Which would be white yet blushes at its pride,
   Laughs low for love, till jealous Salmacis
   Peers through the myrtle-leaves and sighs for pain of lonely bliss.

   There never does that dreary north-wind blow
      Which leaves our English forests bleak and bare,
   Nor ever falls the swift white-feathered snow,
      Nor ever doth the red-toothed lightning dare
   To wake them in the silver-fretted night
   When we lie weeping for some sweet sad sin, some dead delight.

   Alas! they know the far Lethæan spring,
      The violet-hidden waters well they know,
   Where one whose feet with tired wandering
      Are faint and broken may take heart and go,
   And from those dark depths cool and crystalline
   Drink, and draw balm, and sleep for sleepless souls, and anodyne.

   But we oppress our natures, God or Fate
      Is our enemy, we starve and feed
   On vain repentance—O we are born too late!
      What balm for us in bruisèd poppy seed
   Who crowd into one finite pulse of time
   The joy of infinite love and the fierce pain of infinite crime.

   O we are wearied of this sense of guilt,
      Wearied of pleasure’s paramour despair,
   Wearied of every temple we have built,
      Wearied of every right, unanswered prayer,
   For man is weak; God sleeps: and heaven is high:
   One fiery-coloured moment: one great love; and lo! we die.

   Ah! but no ferry-man with labouring pole
      Nears his black shallop to the flowerless strand,
   No little coin of bronze can bring the soul
      Over Death’s river to the sunless land,
   Victim and wine and vow are all in vain,
   The tomb is sealed; the soldiers watch; the dead rise not again.

   We are resolved into the supreme air,
      We are made one with what we touch and see,
   With our heart’s blood each crimson sun is fair,
      With our young lives each spring-impassioned tree
   Flames into green, the wildest beasts that range
   The moor our kinsmen are, all life is one, and all is change.

   With beat of systole and of diastole
      One grand great life throbs through earth’s giant heart,
   And mighty waves of single Being roll
      From nerveless germ to man, for we are part
   Of every rock and bird and beast and hill,
   One with the things that prey on us, and one with what we kill.

   From lower cells of waking life we pass
      To full perfection; thus the world grows old:
   We who are godlike now were once a mass
      Of quivering purple flecked with bars of gold,
   Unsentient or of joy or misery,
   And tossed in terrible tangles of some wild and wind-swept sea.

   This hot hard flame with which our bodies burn
      Will make some meadow blaze with daffodil,
   Ay! and those argent breasts of thine will turn
      To water-lilies; the brown fields men till
   Will be more fruitful for our love to-night,
   Nothing is lost in nature, all things live in Death’s despite.

   The boy’s first kiss, the hyacinth’s first bell,
      The man’s last passion, and the last red spear
   That from the lily leaps, the asphodel
      Which will not let its blossoms blow for fear
   Of too much beauty, and the timid shame
   Of the young bridegroom at his lover’s eyes,—these with the same

   One sacrament are consecrate, the earth
      Not we alone hath passions hymeneal,
   The yellow buttercups that shake for mirth
      At daybreak know a pleasure not less real
   Than we do, when in some fresh-blossoming wood,
   We draw the spring into our hearts, and feel that life is good.

   So when men bury us beneath the yew
      Thy crimson-stainèd mouth a rose will be,
   And thy soft eyes lush bluebells dimmed with dew,
      And when the white narcissus wantonly
   Kisses the wind its playmate some faint joy
   Will thrill our dust, and we will be again fond maid and boy.

   And thus without life’s conscious torturing pain
      In some sweet flower we will feel the sun,
   And from the linnet’s throat will sing again,
      And as two gorgeous-mailèd snakes will run
   Over our graves, or as two tigers creep
   Through the hot jungle where the yellow-eyed huge lions sleep

   And give them battle!  How my heart leaps up
      To think of that grand living after death
   In beast and bird and flower, when this cup,
      Being filled too full of spirit, bursts for breath,
   And with the pale leaves of some autumn day
   The soul earth’s earliest conqueror becomes earth’s last great prey.

   O think of it!  We shall inform ourselves
      Into all sensuous life, the goat-foot Faun,
   The Centaur, or the merry bright-eyed Elves
      That leave their dancing rings to spite the dawn
   Upon the meadows, shall not be more near
   Than you and I to nature’s mysteries, for we shall hear

   The thrush’s heart beat, and the daisies grow,
      And the wan snowdrop sighing for the sun
   On sunless days in winter, we shall know
      By whom the silver gossamer is spun,
   Who paints the diapered fritillaries,
   On what wide wings from shivering pine to pine the eagle flies.

   Ay! had we never loved at all, who knows
      If yonder daffodil had lured the bee
   Into its gilded womb, or any rose
      Had hung with crimson lamps its little tree!
   Methinks no leaf would ever bud in spring,
   But for the lovers’ lips that kiss, the poets’ lips that sing.

   Is the light vanished from our golden sun,
      Or is this dædal-fashioned earth less fair,
   That we are nature’s heritors, and one
      With every pulse of life that beats the air?
   Rather new suns across the sky shall pass,
   New splendour come unto the flower, new glory to the grass.

   And we two lovers shall not sit afar,
      Critics of nature, but the joyous sea
   Shall be our raiment, and the bearded star
      Shoot arrows at our pleasure!  We shall be
   Part of the mighty universal whole,
   And through all æons mix and mingle with the Kosmic Soul!

   We shall be notes in that great Symphony
      Whose cadence circles through the rhythmic spheres,
   And all the live World’s throbbing heart shall be
      One with our heart; the stealthy creeping years
   Have lost their terrors now, we shall not die,
   The Universe itself shall be our Immortality.



THE FOURTH MOVEMENT


IMPRESSION


                               LE RÉVEILLON

      THE sky is laced with fitful red,
      The circling mists and shadows flee,
      The dawn is rising from the sea,
   Like a white lady from her bed.

      And jagged brazen arrows fall
      Athwart the feathers of the night,
      And a long wave of yellow light
   Breaks silently on tower and hall,

      And spreading wide across the wold
      Wakes into flight some fluttering bird,
      And all the chestnut tops are stirred,
   And all the branches streaked with gold.


AT VERONA


   HOW steep the stairs within Kings’ houses are
      For exile-wearied feet as mine to tread,
      And O how salt and bitter is the bread
   Which falls from this Hound’s table,—better far
   That I had died in the red ways of war,
      Or that the gate of Florence bare my head,
      Than to live thus, by all things comraded
   Which seek the essence of my soul to mar.

   ‘Curse God and die: what better hope than this?
      He hath forgotten thee in all the bliss
      Of his gold city, and eternal day’—
   Nay peace: behind my prison’s blinded bars
      I do possess what none can take away
      My love, and all the glory of the stars.


APOLOGIA


   IS it thy will that I should wax and wane,
      Barter my cloth of gold for hodden grey,
   And at thy pleasure weave that web of pain
      Whose brightest threads are each a wasted day?

   Is it thy will—Love that I love so well—
      That my Soul’s House should be a tortured spot
   Wherein, like evil paramours, must dwell
      The quenchless flame, the worm that dieth not?

   Nay, if it be thy will I shall endure,
      And sell ambition at the common mart,
   And let dull failure be my vestiture,
      And sorrow dig its grave within my heart.

   Perchance it may be better so—at least
      I have not made my heart a heart of stone,
   Nor starved my boyhood of its goodly feast,
      Nor walked where Beauty is a thing unknown.

   Many a man hath done so; sought to fence
      In straitened bonds the soul that should be free,
   Trodden the dusty road of common sense,
      While all the forest sang of liberty,

   Not marking how the spotted hawk in flight
      Passed on wide pinion through the lofty air,
   To where some steep untrodden mountain height
      Caught the last tresses of the Sun God’s hair.

   Or how the little flower he trod upon,
      The daisy, that white-feathered shield of gold,
   Followed with wistful eyes the wandering sun
      Content if once its leaves were aureoled.

   But surely it is something to have been
      The best belovèd for a little while,
   To have walked hand in hand with Love, and seen
      His purple wings flit once across thy smile.

   Ay! though the gorgèd asp of passion feed
      On my boy’s heart, yet have I burst the bars,
   Stood face to face with Beauty, known indeed
      The Love which moves the Sun and all the stars!


QUIA MULTUM AMAVI


   DEAR Heart, I think the young impassioned priest
      When first he takes from out the hidden shrine
   His God imprisoned in the Eucharist,
      And eats the bread, and drinks the dreadful wine,

   Feels not such awful wonder as I felt
      When first my smitten eyes beat full on thee,
   And all night long before thy feet I knelt
      Till thou wert wearied of Idolatry.

   Ah! hadst thou liked me less and loved me more,
      Through all those summer days of joy and rain,
   I had not now been sorrow’s heritor,
      Or stood a lackey in the House of Pain.

   Yet, though remorse, youth’s white-faced seneschal,
      Tread on my heels with all his retinue,
   I am most glad I loved thee—think of all
      The suns that go to make one speedwell blue!


SILENTIUM AMORIS


   AS often-times the too resplendent sun
      Hurries the pallid and reluctant moon
   Back to her sombre cave, ere she hath won
      A single ballad from the nightingale,
      So doth thy Beauty make my lips to fail,
   And all my sweetest singing out of tune.

   And as at dawn across the level mead
      On wings impetuous some wind will come,
   And with its too harsh kisses break the reed
      Which was its only instrument of song,
      So my too stormy passions work me wrong,
   And for excess of Love my Love is dumb.

   But surely unto Thee mine eyes did show
      Why I am silent, and my lute unstrung;
   Else it were better we should part, and go,
      Thou to some lips of sweeter melody,
      And I to nurse the barren memory
   Of unkissed kisses, and songs never sung.


HER VOICE


   THE wild bee reels from bough to bough
      With his furry coat and his gauzy wing,
   Now in a lily-cup, and now
      Setting a jacinth bell a-swing,
            In his wandering;
   Sit closer love: it was here I trow
            I made that vow,

   Swore that two lives should be like one
      As long as the sea-gull loved the sea,
   As long as the sunflower sought the sun,—
      It shall be, I said, for eternity
            ’Twixt you and me!
   Dear friend, those times are over and done;
            Love’s web is spun.

   Look upward where the poplar trees
      Sway and sway in the summer air,
   Here in the valley never a breeze
      Scatters the thistledown, but there
            Great winds blow fair
   From the mighty murmuring mystical seas,
            And the wave-lashed leas.

   Look upward where the white gull screams,
      What does it see that we do not see?
   Is that a star? or the lamp that gleams
      On some outward voyaging argosy,—
            Ah! can it be
   We have lived our lives in a land of dreams!
            How sad it seems.

   Sweet, there is nothing left to say
      But this, that love is never lost,
   Keen winter stabs the breasts of May
      Whose crimson roses burst his frost,
            Ships tempest-tossed
   Will find a harbour in some bay,
            And so we may.

   And there is nothing left to do
      But to kiss once again, and part,
   Nay, there is nothing we should rue,
      I have my beauty,—you your Art,
            Nay, do not start,
   One world was not enough for two
            Like me and you.


MY VOICE


   WITHIN this restless, hurried, modern world
      We took our hearts’ full pleasure—You and I,
   And now the white sails of our ship are furled,
      And spent the lading of our argosy.

   Wherefore my cheeks before their time are wan,
      For very weeping is my gladness fled,
   Sorrow has paled my young mouth’s vermilion,
      And Ruin draws the curtains of my bed.

   But all this crowded life has been to thee
      No more than lyre, or lute, or subtle spell
   Of viols, or the music of the sea
      That sleeps, a mimic echo, in the shell.


TÆDIUM VITÆ


   TO stab my youth with desperate knives, to wear
   This paltry age’s gaudy livery,
   To let each base hand filch my treasury,
   To mesh my soul within a woman’s hair,
   And be mere Fortune’s lackeyed groom,—I swear
   I love it not! these things are less to me
   Than the thin foam that frets upon the sea,
   Less than the thistledown of summer air
   Which hath no seed: better to stand aloof
   Far from these slanderous fools who mock my life
   Knowing me not, better the lowliest roof
   Fit for the meanest hind to sojourn in,
   Than to go back to that hoarse cave of strife
   Where my white soul first kissed the mouth of sin.



HUMANITAD


   IT is full winter now: the trees are bare,
      Save where the cattle huddle from the cold
   Beneath the pine, for it doth never wear
      The autumn’s gaudy livery whose gold
   Her jealous brother pilfers, but is true
   To the green doublet; bitter is the wind, as though it blew

   From Saturn’s cave; a few thin wisps of hay
      Lie on the sharp black hedges, where the wain
   Dragged the sweet pillage of a summer’s day
      From the low meadows up the narrow lane;
   Upon the half-thawed snow the bleating sheep
   Press close against the hurdles, and the shivering house-dogs creep

   From the shut stable to the frozen stream
      And back again disconsolate, and miss
   The bawling shepherds and the noisy team;
      And overhead in circling listlessness
   The cawing rooks whirl round the frosted stack,
   Or crowd the dripping boughs; and in the fen the ice-pools crack

   Where the gaunt bittern stalks among the reeds
      And flaps his wings, and stretches back his neck,
   And hoots to see the moon; across the meads
      Limps the poor frightened hare, a little speck;
   And a stray seamew with its fretful cry
   Flits like a sudden drift of snow against the dull grey sky.

   Full winter: and the lusty goodman brings
      His load of faggots from the chilly byre,
   And stamps his feet upon the hearth, and flings
      The sappy billets on the waning fire,
   And laughs to see the sudden lightening scare
   His children at their play, and yet,—the spring is in the air;

   Already the slim crocus stirs the snow,
      And soon yon blanchèd fields will bloom again
   With nodding cowslips for some lad to mow,
      For with the first warm kisses of the rain
   The winter’s icy sorrow breaks to tears,
   And the brown thrushes mate, and with bright eyes the rabbit peers

   From the dark warren where the fir-cones lie,
      And treads one snowdrop under foot, and runs
   Over the mossy knoll, and blackbirds fly
      Across our path at evening, and the suns
   Stay longer with us; ah! how good to see
   Grass-girdled spring in all her joy of laughing greenery

   Dance through the hedges till the early rose,
      (That sweet repentance of the thorny briar!)
   Burst from its sheathèd emerald and disclose
      The little quivering disk of golden fire
   Which the bees know so well, for with it come
   Pale boy’s-love, sops-in-wine, and daffadillies all in bloom.

   Then up and down the field the sower goes,
      While close behind the laughing younker scares
   With shrilly whoop the black and thievish crows,
      And then the chestnut-tree its glory wears,
   And on the grass the creamy blossom falls
   In odorous excess, and faint half-whispered madrigals

   Steal from the bluebells’ nodding carillons
      Each breezy morn, and then white jessamine,
   That star of its own heaven, snap-dragons
      With lolling crimson tongues, and eglantine
   In dusty velvets clad usurp the bed
   And woodland empery, and when the lingering rose hath shed

   Red leaf by leaf its folded panoply,
      And pansies closed their purple-lidded eyes,
   Chrysanthemums from gilded argosy
      Unload their gaudy scentless merchandise,
   And violets getting overbold withdraw
   From their shy nooks, and scarlet berries dot the leafless haw.

   O happy field! and O thrice happy tree!
      Soon will your queen in daisy-flowered smock
   And crown of flower-de-luce trip down the lea,
      Soon will the lazy shepherds drive their flock
   Back to the pasture by the pool, and soon
   Through the green leaves will float the hum of murmuring bees at noon.

   Soon will the glade be bright with bellamour,
      The flower which wantons love, and those sweet nuns
   Vale-lilies in their snowy vestiture
      Will tell their beaded pearls, and carnations
   With mitred dusky leaves will scent the wind,
   And straggling traveller’s-joy each hedge with yellow stars will bind.

   Dear bride of Nature and most bounteous spring,
      That canst give increase to the sweet-breath’d kine,
   And to the kid its little horns, and bring
      The soft and silky blossoms to the vine,
   Where is that old nepenthe which of yore
   Man got from poppy root and glossy-berried mandragore!

   There was a time when any common bird
      Could make me sing in unison, a time
   When all the strings of boyish life were stirred
      To quick response or more melodious rhyme
   By every forest idyll;—do I change?
   Or rather doth some evil thing through thy fair pleasaunce range?

   Nay, nay, thou art the same: ’tis I who seek
      To vex with sighs thy simple solitude,
   And because fruitless tears bedew my cheek
      Would have thee weep with me in brotherhood;
   Fool! shall each wronged and restless spirit dare
   To taint such wine with the salt poison of own despair!

   Thou art the same: ’tis I whose wretched soul
      Takes discontent to be its paramour,
   And gives its kingdom to the rude control
      Of what should be its servitor,—for sure
   Wisdom is somewhere, though the stormy sea
   Contain it not, and the huge deep answer ‘’Tis not in me.’

   To burn with one clear flame, to stand erect
      In natural honour, not to bend the knee
   In profitless prostrations whose effect
      Is by itself condemned, what alchemy
   Can teach me this? what herb Medea brewed
   Will bring the unexultant peace of essence not subdued?

   The minor chord which ends the harmony,
      And for its answering brother waits in vain
   Sobbing for incompleted melody,
      Dies a swan’s death; but I the heir of pain,
   A silent Memnon with blank lidless eyes,
   Wait for the light and music of those suns which never rise.

   The quenched-out torch, the lonely cypress-gloom,
      The little dust stored in the narrow urn,
   The gentle ΧΑΙΡΕ of the Attic tomb,—
      Were not these better far than to return
   To my old fitful restless malady,
   Or spend my days within the voiceless cave of misery?

   Nay! for perchance that poppy-crownèd god
      Is like the watcher by a sick man’s bed
   Who talks of sleep but gives it not; his rod
      Hath lost its virtue, and, when all is said,
   Death is too rude, too obvious a key
   To solve one single secret in a life’s philosophy.

   And Love! that noble madness, whose august
      And inextinguishable might can slay
   The soul with honeyed drugs,—alas! I must
      From such sweet ruin play the runaway,
   Although too constant memory never can
   Forget the archèd splendour of those brows Olympian

   Which for a little season made my youth
      So soft a swoon of exquisite indolence
   That all the chiding of more prudent Truth
      Seemed the thin voice of jealousy,—O hence
   Thou huntress deadlier than Artemis!
   Go seek some other quarry! for of thy too perilous bliss.

   My lips have drunk enough,—no more, no more,—
      Though Love himself should turn his gilded prow
   Back to the troubled waters of this shore
      Where I am wrecked and stranded, even now
   The chariot wheels of passion sweep too near,
   Hence!  Hence!  I pass unto a life more barren, more austere.

   More barren—ay, those arms will never lean
      Down through the trellised vines and draw my soul
   In sweet reluctance through the tangled green;
      Some other head must wear that aureole,
   For I am hers who loves not any man
   Whose white and stainless bosom bears the sign Gorgonian.

   Let Venus go and chuck her dainty page,
      And kiss his mouth, and toss his curly hair,
   With net and spear and hunting equipage
      Let young Adonis to his tryst repair,
   But me her fond and subtle-fashioned spell
   Delights no more, though I could win her dearest citadel.

   Ay, though I were that laughing shepherd boy
      Who from Mount Ida saw the little cloud
   Pass over Tenedos and lofty Troy
      And knew the coming of the Queen, and bowed
   In wonder at her feet, not for the sake
   Of a new Helen would I bid her hand the apple take.

   Then rise supreme Athena argent-limbed!
      And, if my lips be musicless, inspire
   At least my life: was not thy glory hymned
      By One who gave to thee his sword and lyre
   Like Æschylos at well-fought Marathon,
   And died to show that Milton’s England still could bear a son!

   And yet I cannot tread the Portico
      And live without desire, fear and pain,
   Or nurture that wise calm which long ago
      The grave Athenian master taught to men,
   Self-poised, self-centred, and self-comforted,
   To watch the world’s vain phantasies go by with unbowed head.

   Alas! that serene brow, those eloquent lips,
      Those eyes that mirrored all eternity,
   Rest in their own Colonos, an eclipse
      Hath come on Wisdom, and Mnemosyne
   Is childless; in the night which she had made
   For lofty secure flight Athena’s owl itself hath strayed.

   Nor much with Science do I care to climb,
      Although by strange and subtle witchery
   She drew the moon from heaven: the Muse Time
      Unrolls her gorgeous-coloured tapestry
   To no less eager eyes; often indeed
   In the great epic of Polymnia’s scroll I love to read

   How Asia sent her myriad hosts to war
      Against a little town, and panoplied
   In gilded mail with jewelled scimitar,
      White-shielded, purple-crested, rode the Mede
   Between the waving poplars and the sea
   Which men call Artemisium, till he saw Thermopylæ

   Its steep ravine spanned by a narrow wall,
      And on the nearer side a little brood
   Of careless lions holding festival!
      And stood amazèd at such hardihood,
   And pitched his tent upon the reedy shore,
   And stayed two days to wonder, and then crept at midnight o’er

   Some unfrequented height, and coming down
      The autumn forests treacherously slew
   What Sparta held most dear and was the crown
      Of far Eurotas, and passed on, nor knew
   How God had staked an evil net for him
   In the small bay at Salamis,—and yet, the page grows dim,

   Its cadenced Greek delights me not, I feel
      With such a goodly time too out of tune
   To love it much: for like the Dial’s wheel
      That from its blinded darkness strikes the noon
   Yet never sees the sun, so do my eyes
   Restlessly follow that which from my cheated vision flies.

   O for one grand unselfish simple life
      To teach us what is Wisdom! speak ye hills
   Of lone Helvellyn, for this note of strife
      Shunned your untroubled crags and crystal rills,
   Where is that Spirit which living blamelessly
   Yet dared to kiss the smitten mouth of his own century!

   Speak ye Rydalian laurels! where is he
      Whose gentle head ye sheltered, that pure soul
   Whose gracious days of uncrowned majesty
      Through lowliest conduct touched the lofty goal
   Where love and duty mingle!  Him at least
   The most high Laws were glad of, he had sat at Wisdom’s feast;

   But we are Learning’s changelings, know by rote
      The clarion watchword of each Grecian school
   And follow none, the flawless sword which smote
      The pagan Hydra is an effete tool
   Which we ourselves have blunted, what man now
   Shall scale the august ancient heights and to old Reverence bow?

   One such indeed I saw, but, Ichabod!
      Gone is that last dear son of Italy,
   Who being man died for the sake of God,
      And whose unrisen bones sleep peacefully,
   O guard him, guard him well, my Giotto’s tower,
   Thou marble lily of the lily town! let not the lour

   Of the rude tempest vex his slumber, or
      The Arno with its tawny troubled gold
   O’er-leap its marge, no mightier conqueror
      Clomb the high Capitol in the days of old
   When Rome was indeed Rome, for Liberty
   Walked like a bride beside him, at which sight pale Mystery

   Fled shrieking to her farthest sombrest cell
      With an old man who grabbled rusty keys,
   Fled shuddering, for that immemorial knell
      With which oblivion buries dynasties
   Swept like a wounded eagle on the blast,
   As to the holy heart of Rome the great triumvir passed.

   He knew the holiest heart and heights of Rome,
      He drave the base wolf from the lion’s lair,
   And now lies dead by that empyreal dome
      Which overtops Valdarno hung in air
   By Brunelleschi—O Melpomene
   Breathe through thy melancholy pipe thy sweetest threnody!

   Breathe through the tragic stops such melodies
      That Joy’s self may grow jealous, and the Nine
   Forget awhile their discreet emperies,
      Mourning for him who on Rome’s lordliest shrine
   Lit for men’s lives the light of Marathon,
   And bare to sun-forgotten fields the fire of the sun!

   O guard him, guard him well, my Giotto’s tower!
      Let some young Florentine each eventide
   Bring coronals of that enchanted flower
      Which the dim woods of Vallombrosa hide,
   And deck the marble tomb wherein he lies
   Whose soul is as some mighty orb unseen of mortal eyes;

   Some mighty orb whose cycled wanderings,
      Being tempest-driven to the farthest rim
   Where Chaos meets Creation and the wings
      Of the eternal chanting Cherubim
   Are pavilioned on Nothing, passed away
   Into a moonless void,—and yet, though he is dust and clay,

   He is not dead, the immemorial Fates
      Forbid it, and the closing shears refrain.
   Lift up your heads ye everlasting gates!
      Ye argent clarions, sound a loftier strain
   For the vile thing he hated lurks within
   Its sombre house, alone with God and memories of sin.

   Still what avails it that she sought her cave
      That murderous mother of red harlotries?
   At Munich on the marble architrave
      The Grecian boys die smiling, but the seas
   Which wash Ægina fret in loneliness
   Not mirroring their beauty; so our lives grow colourless

   For lack of our ideals, if one star
      Flame torch-like in the heavens the unjust
   Swift daylight kills it, and no trump of war
      Can wake to passionate voice the silent dust
   Which was Mazzini once! rich Niobe
   For all her stony sorrows hath her sons; but Italy,

   What Easter Day shall make her children rise,
      Who were not Gods yet suffered? what sure feet
   Shall find their grave-clothes folded? what clear eyes
      Shall see them bodily?  O it were meet
   To roll the stone from off the sepulchre
   And kiss the bleeding roses of their wounds, in love of her,

   Our Italy! our mother visible!
      Most blessed among nations and most sad,
   For whose dear sake the young Calabrian fell
      That day at Aspromonte and was glad
   That in an age when God was bought and sold
   One man could die for Liberty! but we, burnt out and cold,

   See Honour smitten on the cheek and gyves
      Bind the sweet feet of Mercy: Poverty
   Creeps through our sunless lanes and with sharp knives
      Cuts the warm throats of children stealthily,
   And no word said:—O we are wretched men
   Unworthy of our great inheritance! where is the pen

   Of austere Milton? where the mighty sword
      Which slew its master righteously? the years
   Have lost their ancient leader, and no word
      Breaks from the voiceless tripod on our ears:
   While as a ruined mother in some spasm
   Bears a base child and loathes it, so our best enthusiasm

   Genders unlawful children, Anarchy
      Freedom’s own Judas, the vile prodigal
   Licence who steals the gold of Liberty
      And yet has nothing, Ignorance the real
   One Fraticide since Cain, Envy the asp
   That stings itself to anguish, Avarice whose palsied grasp

   Is in its extent stiffened, moneyed Greed
      For whose dull appetite men waste away
   Amid the whirr of wheels and are the seed
      Of things which slay their sower, these each day
   Sees rife in England, and the gentle feet
   Of Beauty tread no more the stones of each unlovely street.

   What even Cromwell spared is desecrated
      By weed and worm, left to the stormy play
   Of wind and beating snow, or renovated
      By more destructful hands: Time’s worst decay
   Will wreathe its ruins with some loveliness,
   But these new Vandals can but make a rain-proof barrenness.

   Where is that Art which bade the Angels sing
      Through Lincoln’s lofty choir, till the air
   Seems from such marble harmonies to ring
      With sweeter song than common lips can dare
   To draw from actual reed? ah! where is now
   The cunning hand which made the flowering hawthorn branches bow

   For Southwell’s arch, and carved the House of One
      Who loved the lilies of the field with all
   Our dearest English flowers? the same sun
      Rises for us: the seasons natural
   Weave the same tapestry of green and grey:
   The unchanged hills are with us: but that Spirit hath passed away.

   And yet perchance it may be better so,
      For Tyranny is an incestuous Queen,
   Murder her brother is her bedfellow,
      And the Plague chambers with her: in obscene
   And bloody paths her treacherous feet are set;
   Better the empty desert and a soul inviolate!

   For gentle brotherhood, the harmony
      Of living in the healthful air, the swift
   Clean beauty of strong limbs when men are free
      And women chaste, these are the things which lift
   Our souls up more than even Agnolo’s
   Gaunt blinded Sibyl poring o’er the scroll of human woes,

   Or Titian’s little maiden on the stair
      White as her own sweet lily and as tall,
   Or Mona Lisa smiling through her hair,—
      Ah! somehow life is bigger after all
   Than any painted angel, could we see
   The God that is within us!  The old Greek serenity

   Which curbs the passion of that level line
      Of marble youths, who with untroubled eyes
   And chastened limbs ride round Athena’s shrine
      And mirror her divine economies,
   And balanced symmetry of what in man
   Would else wage ceaseless warfare,—this at least within the span

   Between our mother’s kisses and the grave
      Might so inform our lives, that we could win
   Such mighty empires that from her cave
      Temptation would grow hoarse, and pallid Sin
   Would walk ashamed of his adulteries,
   And Passion creep from out the House of Lust with startled eyes.

   To make the body and the spirit one
      With all right things, till no thing live in vain
   From morn to noon, but in sweet unison
      With every pulse of flesh and throb of brain
   The soul in flawless essence high enthroned,
   Against all outer vain attack invincibly bastioned,

   Mark with serene impartiality
      The strife of things, and yet be comforted,
   Knowing that by the chain causality
      All separate existences are wed
   Into one supreme whole, whose utterance
   Is joy, or holier praise! ah! surely this were governance

   Of Life in most august omnipresence,
      Through which the rational intellect would find
   In passion its expression, and mere sense,
      Ignoble else, lend fire to the mind,
   And being joined with it in harmony
   More mystical than that which binds the stars planetary,

   Strike from their several tones one octave chord
      Whose cadence being measureless would fly
   Through all the circling spheres, then to its Lord
      Return refreshed with its new empery
   And more exultant power,—this indeed
   Could we but reach it were to find the last, the perfect creed.

   Ah! it was easy when the world was young
      To keep one’s life free and inviolate,
   From our sad lips another song is rung,
      By our own hands our heads are desecrate,
   Wanderers in drear exile, and dispossessed
   Of what should be our own, we can but feed on wild unrest.

   Somehow the grace, the bloom of things has flown,
      And of all men we are most wretched who
   Must live each other’s lives and not our own
      For very pity’s sake and then undo
   All that we lived for—it was otherwise
   When soul and body seemed to blend in mystic symphonies.

   But we have left those gentle haunts to pass
      With weary feet to the new Calvary,
   Where we behold, as one who in a glass
      Sees his own face, self-slain Humanity,
   And in the dumb reproach of that sad gaze
   Learn what an awful phantom the red hand of man can raise.

   O smitten mouth!  O forehead crowned with thorn!
      O chalice of all common miseries!
   Thou for our sakes that loved thee not hast borne
      An agony of endless centuries,
   And we were vain and ignorant nor knew
   That when we stabbed thy heart it was our own real hearts we slew.

   Being ourselves the sowers and the seeds,
      The night that covers and the lights that fade,
   The spear that pierces and the side that bleeds,
      The lips betraying and the life betrayed;
   The deep hath calm: the moon hath rest: but we
   Lords of the natural world are yet our own dread enemy.

   Is this the end of all that primal force
      Which, in its changes being still the same,
   From eyeless Chaos cleft its upward course,
      Through ravenous seas and whirling rocks and flame,
   Till the suns met in heaven and began
   Their cycles, and the morning stars sang, and the Word was Man!

   Nay, nay, we are but crucified, and though
      The bloody sweat falls from our brows like rain
   Loosen the nails—we shall come down I know,
      Staunch the red wounds—we shall be whole again,
   No need have we of hyssop-laden rod,
   That which is purely human, that is godlike, that is God.



FLOWER OF LOVE


ΓΛΥΚΥΠΙΚΡΟΣ ΕΡΩΣ


   SWEET, I blame you not, for mine the fault
      was, had I not been made of common clay
   I had climbed the higher heights unclimbed
      yet, seen the fuller air, the larger day.

   From the wildness of my wasted passion I had
      struck a better, clearer song,
   Lit some lighter light of freer freedom, battled
      with some Hydra-headed wrong.

   Had my lips been smitten into music by the
      kisses that but made them bleed,
   You had walked with Bice and the angels on
      that verdant and enamelled mead.

   I had trod the road which Dante treading saw
      the suns of seven circles shine,
   Ay! perchance had seen the heavens opening,
      as they opened to the Florentine.

   And the mighty nations would have crowned
      me, who am crownless now and without name,
   And some orient dawn had found me kneeling
      on the threshold of the House of Fame.

   I had sat within that marble circle where the
      oldest bard is as the young,
   And the pipe is ever dropping honey, and the
      lyre’s strings are ever strung.

   Keats had lifted up his hymeneal curls from out
      the poppy-seeded wine,
   With ambrosial mouth had kissed my forehead,
      clasped the hand of noble love in mine.

   And at springtide, when the apple-blossoms brush
      the burnished bosom of the dove,
   Two young lovers lying in an orchard would
      have read the story of our love.

   Would have read the legend of my passion,
      known the bitter secret of my heart,
   Kissed as we have kissed, but never parted as
      we two are fated now to part.

   For the crimson flower of our life is eaten by
      the cankerworm of truth,
   And no hand can gather up the fallen withered
      petals of the rose of youth.

   Yet I am not sorry that I loved you—ah! what
      else had I a boy to do,—
   For the hungry teeth of time devour, and the
      silent-footed years pursue.

   Rudderless, we drift athwart a tempest, and
      when once the storm of youth is past,
   Without lyre, without lute or chorus, Death
      the silent pilot comes at last.

   And within the grave there is no pleasure, for
      the blindworm battens on the root,
   And Desire shudders into ashes, and the tree of
      Passion bears no fruit.

   Ah! what else had I to do but love you, God’s
      own mother was less dear to me,
   And less dear the Cytheræan rising like an
      argent lily from the sea.

   I have made my choice, have lived my poems,
      and, though youth is gone in wasted days,
   I have found the lover’s crown of myrtle better
      than the poet’s crown of bays.




UNCOLLECTED POEMS


FROM SPRING DAYS TO WINTER


                               (FOR MUSIC)

   IN the glad springtime when leaves were green,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   I sought, amid the tangled sheen,
   Love whom mine eyes had never seen,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   Between the blossoms red and white,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   My love first came into my sight,
   O perfect vision of delight,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   The yellow apples glowed like fire,
      O merrily the throstle sings!
   O Love too great for lip or lyre,
   Blown rose of love and of desire,
      O the glad dove has golden wings!

   But now with snow the tree is grey,
      Ah, sadly now the throstle sings!
   My love is dead: ah! well-a-day,
   See at her silent feet I lay
      A dove with broken wings!
      Ah, Love! ah, Love! that thou wert slain—
   Fond Dove, fond Dove return again!



TRISTITÆ


               _Αἴλινον_, _αἴλινον εἰπέ_, _τὸ δ’ εὖ νικάτω_

   O WELL for him who lives at ease
      With garnered gold in wide domain,
      Nor heeds the splashing of the rain,
   The crashing down of forest trees.

   O well for him who ne’er hath known
      The travail of the hungry years,
      A father grey with grief and tears,
   A mother weeping all alone.

   But well for him whose foot hath trod
      The weary road of toil and strife,
      Yet from the sorrows of his life.
   Builds ladders to be nearer God.



THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE


   . . . _ἀναyκαίως δ’ ἔχει_
   _Βίον θερίζειν ὥστε κάρπιμον στάχυν_,
   _καὶ τὸν yὲν εἶναι τὸν δὲ yή_.

   THOU knowest all; I seek in vain
      What lands to till or sow with seed—
      The land is black with briar and weed,
   Nor cares for falling tears or rain.

   Thou knowest all; I sit and wait
      With blinded eyes and hands that fail,
      Till the last lifting of the veil
   And the first opening of the gate.

   Thou knowest all; I cannot see.
      I trust I shall not live in vain,
      I know that we shall meet again
   In some divine eternity.



IMPRESSIONS


I
LE JARDIN


   THE lily’s withered chalice falls
      Around its rod of dusty gold,
      And from the beech-trees on the wold
   The last wood-pigeon coos and calls.

   The gaudy leonine sunflower
      Hangs black and barren on its stalk,
      And down the windy garden walk
   The dead leaves scatter,—hour by hour.

   Pale privet-petals white as milk
      Are blown into a snowy mass:
      The roses lie upon the grass
   Like little shreds of crimson silk.


II
LA MER


   A WHITE mist drifts across the shrouds,
      A wild moon in this wintry sky
      Gleams like an angry lion’s eye
   Out of a mane of tawny clouds.

   The muffled steersman at the wheel
      Is but a shadow in the gloom;—
      And in the throbbing engine-room
   Leap the long rods of polished steel.

   The shattered storm has left its trace
      Upon this huge and heaving dome,
      For the thin threads of yellow foam
   Float on the waves like ravelled lace.



UNDER THE BALCONY


   O BEAUTIFUL star with the crimson mouth!
      O moon with the brows of gold!
   Rise up, rise up, from the odorous south!
         And light for my love her way,
         Lest her little feet should stray
      On the windy hill and the wold!
   O beautiful star with the crimson mouth!
      O moon with the brows of gold!

   O ship that shakes on the desolate sea!
      O ship with the wet, white sail!
   Put in, put in, to the port to me!
         For my love and I would go
         To the land where the daffodils blow
      In the heart of a violet dale!
   O ship that shakes on the desolate sea!
      O ship with the wet, white sail!

   O rapturous bird with the low, sweet note!
      O bird that sits on the spray!
   Sing on, sing on, from your soft brown throat!
         And my love in her little bed
         Will listen, and lift her head
      From the pillow, and come my way!
   O rapturous bird with the low, sweet note!
      O bird that sits on the spray!

   O blossom that hangs in the tremulous air!
      O blossom with lips of snow!
   Come down, come down, for my love to wear!
         You will die on her head in a crown,
         You will die in a fold of her gown,
      To her little light heart you will go!
   O blossom that hangs in the tremulous air!
      O blossom with lips of snow!



THE HARLOT’S HOUSE


   WE caught the tread of dancing feet,
   We loitered down the moonlit street,
   And stopped beneath the harlot’s house.

   Inside, above the din and fray,
   We heard the loud musicians play
   The ‘Treues Liebes Herz’ of Strauss.

   Like strange mechanical grotesques,
   Making fantastic arabesques,
   The shadows raced across the blind.

   We watched the ghostly dancers spin
   To sound of horn and violin,
   Like black leaves wheeling in the wind.

   Like wire-pulled automatons,
   Slim silhouetted skeletons
   Went sidling through the slow quadrille,

   Then took each other by the hand,
   And danced a stately saraband;
   Their laughter echoed thin and shrill.

   Sometimes a clockwork puppet pressed
   A phantom lover to her breast,
   Sometimes they seemed to try to sing.

   Sometimes a horrible marionette
   Came out, and smoked its cigarette
   Upon the steps like a live thing.

   Then, turning to my love, I said,
   ‘The dead are dancing with the dead,
   The dust is whirling with the dust.’

   But she—she heard the violin,
   And left my side, and entered in:
   Love passed into the house of lust.

   Then suddenly the tune went false,
   The dancers wearied of the waltz,
   The shadows ceased to wheel and whirl.

   And down the long and silent street,
   The dawn, with silver-sandalled feet,
   Crept like a frightened girl.



LE JARDIN DES TUILERIES


   THIS winter air is keen and cold,
      And keen and cold this winter sun,
      But round my chair the children run
   Like little things of dancing gold.

   Sometimes about the painted kiosk
      The mimic soldiers strut and stride,
      Sometimes the blue-eyed brigands hide
   In the bleak tangles of the bosk.

   And sometimes, while the old nurse cons
      Her book, they steal across the square,
      And launch their paper navies where
   Huge Triton writhes in greenish bronze.

   And now in mimic flight they flee,
      And now they rush, a boisterous band—
      And, tiny hand on tiny hand,
   Climb up the black and leafless tree.

   Ah! cruel tree! if I were you,
      And children climbed me, for their sake
      Though it be winter I would break
   Into spring blossoms white and blue!



ON THE SALE BY AUCTION OF KEATS’ LOVE LETTERS


   THESE are the letters which Endymion wrote
      To one he loved in secret, and apart.
      And now the brawlers of the auction mart
   Bargain and bid for each poor blotted note,
   Ay! for each separate pulse of passion quote
      The merchant’s price.  I think they love not art
      Who break the crystal of a poet’s heart
   That small and sickly eyes may glare and gloat.

   Is it not said that many years ago,
      In a far Eastern town, some soldiers ran
      With torches through the midnight, and began
   To wrangle for mean raiment, and to throw
      Dice for the garments of a wretched man,
   Not knowing the God’s wonder, or His woe?



THE NEW REMORSE


   THE sin was mine; I did not understand.
      So now is music prisoned in her cave,
      Save where some ebbing desultory wave
   Frets with its restless whirls this meagre strand.
   And in the withered hollow of this land
      Hath Summer dug herself so deep a grave,
      That hardly can the leaden willow crave
   One silver blossom from keen Winter’s hand.

   But who is this who cometh by the shore?
   (Nay, love, look up and wonder!)  Who is this
      Who cometh in dyed garments from the South?
   It is thy new-found Lord, and he shall kiss
      The yet unravished roses of thy mouth,
   And I shall weep and worship, as before.



FANTAISIES DÉCORATIVES


I
LE PANNEAU


   UNDER the rose-tree’s dancing shade
      There stands a little ivory girl,
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl
   With pale green nails of polished jade.

   The red leaves fall upon the mould,
      The white leaves flutter, one by one,
      Down to a blue bowl where the sun,
   Like a great dragon, writhes in gold.

   The white leaves float upon the air,
      The red leaves flutter idly down,
      Some fall upon her yellow gown,
   And some upon her raven hair.

   She takes an amber lute and sings,
      And as she sings a silver crane
      Begins his scarlet neck to strain,
   And flap his burnished metal wings.

   She takes a lute of amber bright,
      And from the thicket where he lies
      Her lover, with his almond eyes,
   Watches her movements in delight.

   And now she gives a cry of fear,
      And tiny tears begin to start:
      A thorn has wounded with its dart
   The pink-veined sea-shell of her ear.

   And now she laughs a merry note:
      There has fallen a petal of the rose
      Just where the yellow satin shows
   The blue-veined flower of her throat.

   With pale green nails of polished jade,
      Pulling the leaves of pink and pearl,
      There stands a little ivory girl
   Under the rose-tree’s dancing shade.


II
LES BALLONS


   AGAINST these turbid turquoise skies
      The light and luminous balloons
      Dip and drift like satin moons,
   Drift like silken butterflies;

   Reel with every windy gust,
      Rise and reel like dancing girls,
      Float like strange transparent pearls,
   Fall and float like silver dust.

   Now to the low leaves they cling,
      Each with coy fantastic pose,
      Each a petal of a rose
   Straining at a gossamer string.

   Then to the tall trees they climb,
      Like thin globes of amethyst,
      Wandering opals keeping tryst
   With the rubies of the lime.



CANZONET


      I HAVE no store
   Of gryphon-guarded gold;
      Now, as before,
   Bare is the shepherd’s fold.
      Rubies nor pearls
   Have I to gem thy throat;
      Yet woodland girls
   Have loved the shepherd’s note.

      Then pluck a reed
   And bid me sing to thee,
      For I would feed
   Thine ears with melody,
      Who art more fair
   Than fairest fleur-de-lys,
      More sweet and rare
   Than sweetest ambergris.

      What dost thou fear?
   Young Hyacinth is slain,
      Pan is not here,
   And will not come again.
      No hornèd Faun
   Treads down the yellow leas,
      No God at dawn
   Steals through the olive trees.

      Hylas is dead,
   Nor will he e’er divine
      Those little red
   Rose-petalled lips of thine.
      On the high hill
   No ivory dryads play,
      Silver and still
   Sinks the sad autumn day.



SYMPHONY IN YELLOW


   AN omnibus across the bridge
      Crawls like a yellow butterfly,
      And, here and there, a passer-by
   Shows like a little restless midge.

   Big barges full of yellow hay
      Are moored against the shadowy wharf,
      And, like a yellow silken scarf,
   The thick fog hangs along the quay.

   The yellow leaves begin to fade
      And flutter from the Temple elms,
      And at my feet the pale green Thames
   Lies like a rod of rippled jade.



IN THE FOREST


   OUT of the mid-wood’s twilight
      Into the meadow’s dawn,
   Ivory limbed and brown-eyed,
      Flashes my Faun!

   He skips through the copses singing,
      And his shadow dances along,
   And I know not which I should follow,
      Shadow or song!

   O Hunter, snare me his shadow!
      O Nightingale, catch me his strain!
   Else moonstruck with music and madness
      I track him in vain!



TO MY WIFE


                         WITH A COPY OF MY POEMS

   I CAN write no stately proem
      As a prelude to my lay;
   From a poet to a poem
      I would dare to say.

   For if of these fallen petals
      One to you seem fair,
   Love will waft it till it settles
      On your hair.

   And when wind and winter harden
      All the loveless land,
   It will whisper of the garden,
      You will understand.



WITH A COPY OF ‘A HOUSE OF POMEGRANATES’


   GO, little book,
   To him who, on a lute with horns of pearl,
   Sang of the white feet of the Golden Girl:
   And bid him look
   Into thy pages: it may hap that he
   May find that golden maidens dance through thee.



ROSES AND RUE


                                (To L. L.)

   COULD we dig up this long-buried treasure,
      Were it worth the pleasure,
   We never could learn love’s song,
      We are parted too long.

   Could the passionate past that is fled
      Call back its dead,
   Could we live it all over again,
      Were it worth the pain!

   I remember we used to meet
      By an ivied seat,
   And you warbled each pretty word
      With the air of a bird;

   And your voice had a quaver in it,
      Just like a linnet,
   And shook, as the blackbird’s throat
      With its last big note;

   And your eyes, they were green and grey
      Like an April day,
   But lit into amethyst
      When I stooped and kissed;

   And your mouth, it would never smile
      For a long, long while,
   Then it rippled all over with laughter
      Five minutes after.

   You were always afraid of a shower,
      Just like a flower:
   I remember you started and ran
      When the rain began.

   I remember I never could catch you,
      For no one could match you,
   You had wonderful, luminous, fleet,
      Little wings to your feet.

   I remember your hair—did I tie it?
      For it always ran riot—
   Like a tangled sunbeam of gold:
      These things are old.

   I remember so well the room,
      And the lilac bloom
   That beat at the dripping pane
      In the warm June rain;

   And the colour of your gown,
      It was amber-brown,
   And two yellow satin bows
      From your shoulders rose.

   And the handkerchief of French lace
      Which you held to your face—
   Had a small tear left a stain?
      Or was it the rain?

   On your hand as it waved adieu
      There were veins of blue;
   In your voice as it said good-bye
      Was a petulant cry,

   ‘You have only wasted your life.’
      (Ah, that was the knife!)
   When I rushed through the garden gate
      It was all too late.

   Could we live it over again,
      Were it worth the pain,
   Could the passionate past that is fled
      Call back its dead!

   Well, if my heart must break,
      Dear love, for your sake,
   It will break in music, I know,
      Poets’ hearts break so.

   But strange that I was not told
      That the brain can hold
   In a tiny ivory cell
      God’s heaven and hell.



DÉSESPOIR


   THE seasons send their ruin as they go,
   For in the spring the narciss shows its head
   Nor withers till the rose has flamed to red,
   And in the autumn purple violets blow,
   And the slim crocus stirs the winter snow;
   Wherefore yon leafless trees will bloom again
   And this grey land grow green with summer rain
   And send up cowslips for some boy to mow.

   But what of life whose bitter hungry sea
   Flows at our heels, and gloom of sunless night
   Covers the days which never more return?
   Ambition, love and all the thoughts that burn
   We lose too soon, and only find delight
   In withered husks of some dead memory.



PAN


                            DOUBLE VILLANELLE

                                      I

   O goat-foot God of Arcady!
   This modern world is grey and old,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   No more the shepherd lads in glee
   Throw apples at thy wattled fold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!

   Nor through the laurels can one see
   Thy soft brown limbs, thy beard of gold,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   And dull and dead our Thames would be,
   For here the winds are chill and cold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!

   Then keep the tomb of Helice,
   Thine olive-woods, thy vine-clad wold,
   And what remains to us of thee?

   Though many an unsung elegy
   Sleeps in the reeds our rivers hold,
   O goat-foot God of Arcady!
   Ah, what remains to us of thee?

                                     II

   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady,
   Thy satyrs and their wanton play,
   This modern world hath need of thee.

   No nymph or Faun indeed have we,
   For Faun and nymph are old and grey,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!

   This is the land where liberty
   Lit grave-browed Milton on his way,
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   A land of ancient chivalry
   Where gentle Sidney saw the day,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!

   This fierce sea-lion of the sea,
   This England lacks some stronger lay,
   This modern world hath need of thee!

   Then blow some trumpet loud and free,
   And give thine oaten pipe away,
   Ah, leave the hills of Arcady!
   This modern world hath need of thee!




THE SPHINX

   IN a dim corner of my room for longer than my fancy thinks
   A beautiful and silent Sphinx has watched me through the shifting
   gloom.

   Inviolate and immobile she does not rise she does not stir
   For silver moons are naught to her and naught to her the suns that
   reel.

   Red follows grey across the air, the waves of moonlight ebb and flow
   But with the Dawn she does not go and in the night-time she is there.

   Dawn follows Dawn and Nights grow old and all the while this curious
   cat
   Lies couching on the Chinese mat with eyes of satin rimmed with gold.

   Upon the mat she lies and leers and on the tawny throat of her
   Flutters the soft and silky fur or ripples to her pointed ears.

   Come forth, my lovely seneschal! so somnolent, so statuesque!
   Come forth you exquisite grotesque! half woman and half animal!

   Come forth my lovely languorous Sphinx! and put your head upon my
   knee!
   And let me stroke your throat and see your body spotted like the Lynx!

   And let me touch those curving claws of yellow ivory and grasp
   The tail that like a monstrous Asp coils round your heavy velvet paws!

                                

   A THOUSAND weary centuries are thine while I have hardly seen
   Some twenty summers cast their green for Autumn’s gaudy liveries.

   But you can read the Hieroglyphs on the great sandstone obelisks,
   And you have talked with Basilisks, and you have looked on
   Hippogriffs.

   O tell me, were you standing by when Isis to Osiris knelt?
   And did you watch the Egyptian melt her union for Antony

   And drink the jewel-drunken wine and bend her head in mimic awe
   To see the huge proconsul draw the salted tunny from the brine?

   And did you mark the Cyprian kiss white Adon on his catafalque?
   And did you follow Amenalk, the God of Heliopolis?

   And did you talk with Thoth, and did you hear the moon-horned Io weep?
   And know the painted kings who sleep beneath the wedge-shaped Pyramid?

                                

   LIFT up your large black satin eyes which are like cushions where one
   sinks!
   Fawn at my feet, fantastic Sphinx! and sing me all your memories!

   Sing to me of the Jewish maid who wandered with the Holy Child,
   And how you led them through the wild, and how they slept beneath your
   shade.

   Sing to me of that odorous green eve when crouching by the marge
   You heard from Adrian’s gilded barge the laughter of Antinous

   And lapped the stream and fed your drouth and watched with hot and
   hungry stare
   The ivory body of that rare young slave with his pomegranate mouth!

   Sing to me of the Labyrinth in which the twi-formed bull was stalled!
   Sing to me of the night you crawled across the temple’s granite plinth

   When through the purple corridors the screaming scarlet Ibis flew
   In terror, and a horrid dew dripped from the moaning Mandragores,

   And the great torpid crocodile within the tank shed slimy tears,
   And tare the jewels from his ears and staggered back into the Nile,

   And the priests cursed you with shrill psalms as in your claws you
   seized their snake
   And crept away with it to slake your passion by the shuddering palms.

                                

   WHO were your lovers? who were they who wrestled for you in the dust?
   Which was the vessel of your Lust?  What Leman had you, every day?

   Did giant Lizards come and crouch before you on the reedy banks?
   Did Gryphons with great metal flanks leap on you in your trampled
   couch?

   Did monstrous hippopotami come sidling toward you in the mist?
   Did gilt-scaled dragons writhe and twist with passion as you passed
   them by?

   And from the brick-built Lycian tomb what horrible Chimera came
   With fearful heads and fearful flame to breed new wonders from your
   womb?

                                

   OR had you shameful secret quests and did you harry to your home
   Some Nereid coiled in amber foam with curious rock crystal breasts?

   Or did you treading through the froth call to the brown Sidonian
   For tidings of Leviathan, Leviathan or Behemoth?

   Or did you when the sun was set climb up the cactus-covered slope
   To meet your swarthy Ethiop whose body was of polished jet?

   Or did you while the earthen skiffs dropped down the grey Nilotic
   flats
   At twilight and the flickering bats flew round the temple’s triple
   glyphs

   Steal to the border of the bar and swim across the silent lake
   And slink into the vault and make the Pyramid your lúpanar

   Till from each black sarcophagus rose up the painted swathèd dead?
   Or did you lure unto your bed the ivory-horned Tragelaphos?

   Or did you love the god of flies who plagued the Hebrews and was
   splashed
   With wine unto the waist? or Pasht, who had green beryls for her eyes?

   Or that young god, the Tyrian, who was more amorous than the dove
   Of Ashtaroth? or did you love the god of the Assyrian

   Whose wings, like strange transparent talc, rose high above his
   hawk-faced head,
   Painted with silver and with red and ribbed with rods of Oreichalch?

   Or did huge Apis from his car leap down and lay before your feet
   Big blossoms of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured nenuphar?

                                

   HOW subtle-secret is your smile!  Did you love none then?  Nay, I know
   Great Ammon was your bedfellow!  He lay with you beside the Nile!

   The river-horses in the slime trumpeted when they saw him come
   Odorous with Syrian galbanum and smeared with spikenard and with
   thyme.

   He came along the river bank like some tall galley argent-sailed,
   He strode across the waters, mailed in beauty, and the waters sank.

   He strode across the desert sand: he reached the valley where you lay:
   He waited till the dawn of day: then touched your black breasts with
   his hand.

   You kissed his mouth with mouths of flame: you made the hornèd god
   your own:
   You stood behind him on his throne: you called him by his secret name.

   You whispered monstrous oracles into the caverns of his ears:
   With blood of goats and blood of steers you taught him monstrous
   miracles.

   White Ammon was your bedfellow!  Your chamber was the steaming Nile!
   And with your curved archaic smile you watched his passion come and
   go.

                                

   WITH Syrian oils his brows were bright: and wide-spread as a tent at
   noon
   His marble limbs made pale the moon and lent the day a larger light.

   His long hair was nine cubits’ span and coloured like that yellow gem
   Which hidden in their garment’s hem the merchants bring from
   Kurdistan.

   His face was as the must that lies upon a vat of new-made wine:
   The seas could not insapphirine the perfect azure of his eyes.

   His thick soft throat was white as milk and threaded with thin veins
   of blue:
   And curious pearls like frozen dew were broidered on his flowing silk.

                                

   ON pearl and porphyry pedestalled he was too bright to look upon:
   For on his ivory breast there shone the wondrous ocean-emerald,

   That mystic moonlit jewel which some diver of the Colchian caves
   Had found beneath the blackening waves and carried to the Colchian
   witch.

   Before his gilded galiot ran naked vine-wreathed corybants,
   And lines of swaying elephants knelt down to draw his chariot,

   And lines of swarthy Nubians bare up his litter as he rode
   Down the great granite-paven road between the nodding peacock-fans.

   The merchants brought him steatite from Sidon in their painted ships:
   The meanest cup that touched his lips was fashioned from a chrysolite.

   The merchants brought him cedar chests of rich apparel bound with
   cords:
   His train was borne by Memphian lords: young kings were glad to be his
   guests.

   Ten hundred shaven priests did bow to Ammon’s altar day and night,
   Ten hundred lamps did wave their light through Ammon’s carven
   house—and now

   Foul snake and speckled adder with their young ones crawl from stone
   to stone
   For ruined is the house and prone the great rose-marble monolith!

   Wild ass or trotting jackal comes and couches in the mouldering gates:
   Wild satyrs call unto their mates across the fallen fluted drums.

   And on the summit of the pile the blue-faced ape of Horus sits
   And gibbers while the fig-tree splits the pillars of the peristyle

                                

   THE god is scattered here and there: deep hidden in the windy sand
   I saw his giant granite hand still clenched in impotent despair.

   And many a wandering caravan of stately negroes silken-shawled,
   Crossing the desert, halts appalled before the neck that none can
   span.

   And many a bearded Bedouin draws back his yellow-striped burnous
   To gaze upon the Titan thews of him who was thy paladin.

                                

   GO, seek his fragments on the moor and wash them in the evening dew,
   And from their pieces make anew thy mutilated paramour!

   Go, seek them where they lie alone and from their broken pieces make
   Thy bruisèd bedfellow!  And wake mad passions in the senseless stone!

   Charm his dull ear with Syrian hymns! he loved your body! oh, be kind,
   Pour spikenard on his hair, and wind soft rolls of linen round his
   limbs!

   Wind round his head the figured coins! stain with red fruits those
   pallid lips!
   Weave purple for his shrunken hips! and purple for his barren loins!

                                

   AWAY to Egypt!  Have no fear.  Only one God has ever died.
   Only one God has let His side be wounded by a soldier’s spear.

   But these, thy lovers, are not dead.  Still by the hundred-cubit gate
   Dog-faced Anubis sits in state with lotus-lilies for thy head.

   Still from his chair of porphyry gaunt Memnon strains his lidless eyes
   Across the empty land, and cries each yellow morning unto thee.

   And Nilus with his broken horn lies in his black and oozy bed
   And till thy coming will not spread his waters on the withering corn.

   Your lovers are not dead, I know.  They will rise up and hear your
   voice
   And clash their cymbals and rejoice and run to kiss your mouth!  And
   so,

   Set wings upon your argosies!  Set horses to your ebon car!
   Back to your Nile!  Or if you are grown sick of dead divinities

   Follow some roving lion’s spoor across the copper-coloured plain,
   Reach out and hale him by the mane and bid him be your paramour!

   Couch by his side upon the grass and set your white teeth in his
   throat
   And when you hear his dying note lash your long flanks of polished
   brass

   And take a tiger for your mate, whose amber sides are flecked with
   black,
   And ride upon his gilded back in triumph through the Theban gate,

   And toy with him in amorous jests, and when he turns, and snarls, and
   gnaws,
   O smite him with your jasper claws! and bruise him with your agate
   breasts!

                                

   WHY are you tarrying?  Get hence!  I weary of your sullen ways,
   I weary of your steadfast gaze, your somnolent magnificence.

   Your horrible and heavy breath makes the light flicker in the lamp,
   And on my brow I feel the damp and dreadful dews of night and death.

   Your eyes are like fantastic moons that shiver in some stagnant lake,
   Your tongue is like a scarlet snake that dances to fantastic tunes,

   Your pulse makes poisonous melodies, and your black throat is like the
   hole
   Left by some torch or burning coal on Saracenic tapestries.

   Away!  The sulphur-coloured stars are hurrying through the Western
   gate!
   Away!  Or it may be too late to climb their silent silver cars!

   See, the dawn shivers round the grey gilt-dialled towers, and the rain
   Streams down each diamonded pane and blurs with tears the wannish day.

   What snake-tressed fury fresh from Hell, with uncouth gestures and
   unclean,
   Stole from the poppy-drowsy queen and led you to a student’s cell?

                                

   WHAT songless tongueless ghost of sin crept through the curtains of
   the night,
   And saw my taper burning bright, and knocked, and bade you enter in?

   Are there not others more accursed, whiter with leprosies than I?
   Are Abana and Pharphar dry that you come here to slake your thirst?

   Get hence, you loathsome mystery!  Hideous animal, get hence!
   You wake in me each bestial sense, you make me what I would not be.

   You make my creed a barren sham, you wake foul dreams of sensual life,
   And Atys with his blood-stained knife were better than the thing I am.

   False Sphinx!  False Sphinx!  By reedy Styx old Charon, leaning on his
   oar,
   Waits for my coin.  Go thou before, and leave me to my crucifix,

   Whose pallid burden, sick with pain, watches the world with wearied
   eyes,
   And weeps for every soul that dies, and weeps for every soul in vain.

RAVENNA


                                     I.

   A YEAR ago I breathed the Italian air,—
   And yet, methinks this northern Spring is fair,—
   These fields made golden with the flower of March,
   The throstle singing on the feathered larch,
   The cawing rooks, the wood-doves fluttering by,
   The little clouds that race across the sky;
   And fair the violet’s gentle drooping head,
   The primrose, pale for love uncomforted,
   The rose that burgeons on the climbing briar,
   The crocus-bed, (that seems a moon of fire
   Round-girdled with a purple marriage-ring);
   And all the flowers of our English Spring,
   Fond snowdrops, and the bright-starred daffodil.
   Up starts the lark beside the murmuring mill,
   And breaks the gossamer-threads of early dew;
   And down the river, like a flame of blue,
   Keen as an arrow flies the water-king,
   While the brown linnets in the greenwood sing.
   A year ago!—it seems a little time
   Since last I saw that lordly southern clime,
   Where flower and fruit to purple radiance blow,
   And like bright lamps the fabled apples glow.
   Full Spring it was—and by rich flowering vines,
   Dark olive-groves and noble forest-pines,
   I rode at will; the moist glad air was sweet,
   The white road rang beneath my horse’s feet,
   And musing on Ravenna’s ancient name,
   I watched the day till, marked with wounds of flame,
   The turquoise sky to burnished gold was turned.

      O how my heart with boyish passion burned,
   When far away across the sedge and mere
   I saw that Holy City rising clear,
   Crowned with her crown of towers!—On and on
   I galloped, racing with the setting sun,
   And ere the crimson after-glow was passed,
   I stood within Ravenna’s walls at last!

                                     II.

      How strangely still! no sound of life or joy
   Startles the air; no laughing shepherd-boy
   Pipes on his reed, nor ever through the day
   Comes the glad sound of children at their play:
   O sad, and sweet, and silent! surely here
   A man might dwell apart from troublous fear,
   Watching the tide of seasons as they flow
   From amorous Spring to Winter’s rain and snow,
   And have no thought of sorrow;—here, indeed,
   Are Lethe’s waters, and that fatal weed
   Which makes a man forget his fatherland.

      Ay! amid lotus-meadows dost thou stand,
   Like Proserpine, with poppy-laden head,
   Guarding the holy ashes of the dead.
   For though thy brood of warrior sons hath ceased,
   Thy noble dead are with thee!—they at least
   Are faithful to thine honour:—guard them well,
   O childless city! for a mighty spell,
   To wake men’s hearts to dreams of things sublime,
   Are the lone tombs where rest the Great of Time.

                                    III.

      Yon lonely pillar, rising on the plain,
   Marks where the bravest knight of France was slain,—
   The Prince of chivalry, the Lord of war,
   Gaston de Foix: for some untimely star
   Led him against thy city, and he fell,
   As falls some forest-lion fighting well.
   Taken from life while life and love were new,
   He lies beneath God’s seamless veil of blue;
   Tall lance-like reeds wave sadly o’er his head,
   And oleanders bloom to deeper red,
   Where his bright youth flowed crimson on the ground.

      Look farther north unto that broken mound,—
   There, prisoned now within a lordly tomb
   Raised by a daughter’s hand, in lonely gloom,
   Huge-limbed Theodoric, the Gothic king,
   Sleeps after all his weary conquering.
   Time hath not spared his ruin,—wind and rain
   Have broken down his stronghold; and again
   We see that Death is mighty lord of all,
   And king and clown to ashen dust must fall

      Mighty indeed _their_ glory! yet to me
   Barbaric king, or knight of chivalry,
   Or the great queen herself, were poor and vain,
   Beside the grave where Dante rests from pain.
   His gilded shrine lies open to the air;
   And cunning sculptor’s hands have carven there
   The calm white brow, as calm as earliest morn,
   The eyes that flashed with passionate love and scorn,
   The lips that sang of Heaven and of Hell,
   The almond-face which Giotto drew so well,
   The weary face of Dante;—to this day,
   Here in his place of resting, far away
   From Arno’s yellow waters, rushing down
   Through the wide bridges of that fairy town,
   Where the tall tower of Giotto seems to rise
   A marble lily under sapphire skies!

   Alas! my Dante! thou hast known the pain
   Of meaner lives,—the exile’s galling chain,
   How steep the stairs within kings’ houses are,
   And all the petty miseries which mar
   Man’s nobler nature with the sense of wrong.
   Yet this dull world is grateful for thy song;
   Our nations do thee homage,—even she,
   That cruel queen of vine-clad Tuscany,
   Who bound with crown of thorns thy living brow,
   Hath decked thine empty tomb with laurels now,
   And begs in vain the ashes of her son.

      O mightiest exile! all thy grief is done:
   Thy soul walks now beside thy Beatrice;
   Ravenna guards thine ashes: sleep in peace.

                                     IV.

      How lone this palace is; how grey the walls!
   No minstrel now wakes echoes in these halls.
   The broken chain lies rusting on the door,
   And noisome weeds have split the marble floor:
   Here lurks the snake, and here the lizards run
   By the stone lions blinking in the sun.
   Byron dwelt here in love and revelry
   For two long years—a second Anthony,
   Who of the world another Actium made!
   Yet suffered not his royal soul to fade,
   Or lyre to break, or lance to grow less keen,
   ’Neath any wiles of an Egyptian queen.
   For from the East there came a mighty cry,
   And Greece stood up to fight for Liberty,
   And called him from Ravenna: never knight
   Rode forth more nobly to wild scenes of fight!
   None fell more bravely on ensanguined field,
   Borne like a Spartan back upon his shield!
   O Hellas!  Hellas! in thine hour of pride,
   Thy day of might, remember him who died
   To wrest from off thy limbs the trammelling chain:
   O Salamis!  O lone Platæan plain!
   O tossing waves of wild Euboean sea!
   O wind-swept heights of lone Thermopylæ!
   He loved you well—ay, not alone in word,
   Who freely gave to thee his lyre and sword,
   Like Æschylos at well-fought Marathon:

      And England, too, shall glory in her son,
   Her warrior-poet, first in song and fight.
   No longer now shall Slander’s venomed spite
   Crawl like a snake across his perfect name,
   Or mar the lordly scutcheon of his fame.

      For as the olive-garland of the race,
   Which lights with joy each eager runner’s face,
   As the red cross which saveth men in war,
   As a flame-bearded beacon seen from far
   By mariners upon a storm-tossed sea,—
   Such was his love for Greece and Liberty!

      Byron, thy crowns are ever fresh and green:
   Red leaves of rose from Sapphic Mitylene
   Shall bind thy brows; the myrtle blooms for thee,
   In hidden glades by lonely Castaly;
   The laurels wait thy coming: all are thine,
   And round thy head one perfect wreath will twine.

                                     V.

      The pine-tops rocked before the evening breeze
   With the hoarse murmur of the wintry seas,
   And the tall stems were streaked with amber bright;—
   I wandered through the wood in wild delight,
   Some startled bird, with fluttering wings and fleet,
   Made snow of all the blossoms; at my feet,
   Like silver crowns, the pale narcissi lay,
   And small birds sang on every twining spray.
   O waving trees, O forest liberty!
   Within your haunts at least a man is free,
   And half forgets the weary world of strife:
   The blood flows hotter, and a sense of life
   Wakes i’ the quickening veins, while once again
   The woods are filled with gods we fancied slain.
   Long time I watched, and surely hoped to see
   Some goat-foot Pan make merry minstrelsy
   Amid the reeds! some startled Dryad-maid
   In girlish flight! or lurking in the glade,
   The soft brown limbs, the wanton treacherous face
   Of woodland god! Queen Dian in the chase,
   White-limbed and terrible, with look of pride,
   And leash of boar-hounds leaping at her side!
   Or Hylas mirrored in the perfect stream.

      O idle heart!  O fond Hellenic dream!
   Ere long, with melancholy rise and swell,
   The evening chimes, the convent’s vesper bell,
   Struck on mine ears amid the amorous flowers.
   Alas! alas! these sweet and honied hours
   Had whelmed my heart like some encroaching sea,
   And drowned all thoughts of black Gethsemane.

                                     VI.

      O lone Ravenna! many a tale is told
   Of thy great glories in the days of old:
   Two thousand years have passed since thou didst see
   Cæsar ride forth to royal victory.
   Mighty thy name when Rome’s lean eagles flew
   From Britain’s isles to far Euphrates blue;
   And of the peoples thou wast noble queen,
   Till in thy streets the Goth and Hun were seen.
   Discrowned by man, deserted by the sea,
   Thou sleepest, rocked in lonely misery!
   No longer now upon thy swelling tide,
   Pine-forest-like, thy myriad galleys ride!
   For where the brass-beaked ships were wont to float,
   The weary shepherd pipes his mournful note;
   And the white sheep are free to come and go
   Where Adria’s purple waters used to flow.

      O fair!  O sad!  O Queen uncomforted!
   In ruined loveliness thou liest dead,
   Alone of all thy sisters; for at last
   Italia’s royal warrior hath passed
   Rome’s lordliest entrance, and hath worn his crown
   In the high temples of the Eternal Town!
   The Palatine hath welcomed back her king,
   And with his name the seven mountains ring!

      And Naples hath outlived her dream of pain,
   And mocks her tyrant!  Venice lives again,
   New risen from the waters! and the cry
   Of Light and Truth, of Love and Liberty,
   Is heard in lordly Genoa, and where
   The marble spires of Milan wound the air,
   Rings from the Alps to the Sicilian shore,
   And Dante’s dream is now a dream no more.

      But thou, Ravenna, better loved than all,
   Thy ruined palaces are but a pall
   That hides thy fallen greatness! and thy name
   Burns like a grey and flickering candle-flame
   Beneath the noonday splendour of the sun
   Of new Italia! for the night is done,
   The night of dark oppression, and the day
   Hath dawned in passionate splendour: far away
   The Austrian hounds are hunted from the land,
   Beyond those ice-crowned citadels which stand
   Girdling the plain of royal Lombardy,
   From the far West unto the Eastern sea.

      I know, indeed, that sons of thine have died
   In Lissa’s waters, by the mountain-side
   Of Aspromonte, on Novara’s plain,—
   Nor have thy children died for thee in vain:
   And yet, methinks, thou hast not drunk this wine
   From grapes new-crushed of Liberty divine,
   Thou hast not followed that immortal Star
   Which leads the people forth to deeds of war.
   Weary of life, thou liest in silent sleep,
   As one who marks the lengthening shadows creep,
   Careless of all the hurrying hours that run,
   Mourning some day of glory, for the sun
   Of Freedom hath not shewn to thee his face,
   And thou hast caught no flambeau in the race.

      Yet wake not from thy slumbers,—rest thee well,
   Amidst thy fields of amber asphodel,
   Thy lily-sprinkled meadows,—rest thee there,
   To mock all human greatness: who would dare
   To vent the paltry sorrows of his life
   Before thy ruins, or to praise the strife
   Of kings’ ambition, and the barren pride
   Of warring nations! wert not thou the Bride
   Of the wild Lord of Adria’s stormy sea!
   The Queen of double Empires! and to thee
   Were not the nations given as thy prey!
   And now—thy gates lie open night and day,
   The grass grows green on every tower and hall,
   The ghastly fig hath cleft thy bastioned wall;
   And where thy mailèd warriors stood at rest
   The midnight owl hath made her secret nest.
   O fallen! fallen! from thy high estate,
   O city trammelled in the toils of Fate,
   Doth nought remain of all thy glorious days,
   But a dull shield, a crown of withered bays!

      Yet who beneath this night of wars and fears,
   From tranquil tower can watch the coming years;
   Who can foretell what joys the day shall bring,
   Or why before the dawn the linnets sing?
   Thou, even thou, mayst wake, as wakes the rose
   To crimson splendour from its grave of snows;
   As the rich corn-fields rise to red and gold
   From these brown lands, now stiff with Winter’s cold;
   As from the storm-rack comes a perfect star!

      O much-loved city!  I have wandered far
   From the wave-circled islands of my home;
   Have seen the gloomy mystery of the Dome
   Rise slowly from the drear Campagna’s way,
   Clothed in the royal purple of the day:
   I from the city of the violet crown
   Have watched the sun by Corinth’s hill go down,
   And marked the ‘myriad laughter’ of the sea
   From starlit hills of flower-starred Arcady;
   Yet back to thee returns my perfect love,
   As to its forest-nest the evening dove.

      O poet’s city! one who scarce has seen
   Some twenty summers cast their doublets green
   For Autumn’s livery, would seek in vain
   To wake his lyre to sing a louder strain,
   Or tell thy days of glory;—poor indeed
   Is the low murmur of the shepherd’s reed,
   Where the loud clarion’s blast should shake the sky,
   And flame across the heavens! and to try
   Such lofty themes were folly: yet I know
   That never felt my heart a nobler glow
   Than when I woke the silence of thy street
   With clamorous trampling of my horse’s feet,
   And saw the city which now I try to sing,
   After long days of weary travelling.

                                    VII.

      Adieu, Ravenna! but a year ago,
   I stood and watched the crimson sunset glow
   From the lone chapel on thy marshy plain:
   The sky was as a shield that caught the stain
   Of blood and battle from the dying sun,
   And in the west the circling clouds had spun
   A royal robe, which some great God might wear,
   While into ocean-seas of purple air
   Sank the gold galley of the Lord of Light.

      Yet here the gentle stillness of the night
   Brings back the swelling tide of memory,
   And wakes again my passionate love for thee:
   Now is the Spring of Love, yet soon will come
   On meadow and tree the Summer’s lordly bloom;
   And soon the grass with brighter flowers will blow,
   And send up lilies for some boy to mow.
   Then before long the Summer’s conqueror,
   Rich Autumn-time, the season’s usurer,
   Will lend his hoarded gold to all the trees,
   And see it scattered by the spendthrift breeze;
   And after that the Winter cold and drear.
   So runs the perfect cycle of the year.
   And so from youth to manhood do we go,
   And fall to weary days and locks of snow.
   Love only knows no winter; never dies:
   Nor cares for frowning storms or leaden skies
   And mine for thee shall never pass away,
   Though my weak lips may falter in my lay.

      Adieu!  Adieu! yon silent evening star,
   The night’s ambassador, doth gleam afar,
   And bid the shepherd bring his flocks to fold.
   Perchance before our inland seas of gold
   Are garnered by the reapers into sheaves,
   Perchance before I see the Autumn leaves,
   I may behold thy city; and lay down
   Low at thy feet the poet’s laurel crown.

      Adieu!  Adieu! yon silver lamp, the moon,
   Which turns our midnight into perfect noon,
   Doth surely light thy towers, guarding well
   Where Dante sleeps, where Byron loved to dwell.

SOME CRUELTIES OF PRISON LIFE.


                   THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY CHRONICLE.

SIR,--I learn with great regret, through an extract from the columns of
your paper, that the warder Martin, of Reading Prison, has been
dismissed by the Prison Commissioners for having given some sweet
biscuits to a little hungry child. I saw the three children myself on
the Monday preceding my release. They had just been convicted, and were
standing in a row in the central hall in their prison dress, carrying
their sheets under the arms previous to their being sent to the cells
allotted to them. I happened to be passing along one of the galleries on
my way to the reception room, where I was to have an interview with a
friend. They were quite small children, the youngest--the one to whom
the warder gave the biscuits--being a tiny little chap, for whom they
had evidently been unable to find clothes small enough to fit. I had, of
course, seen many children in prison during the two years during which I
was myself confined. Wandsworth Prison, especially, contained always a
large number of children. But the little child I saw on the afternoon of
Monday, the 17th, at Reading, was tinier than any one of them. I need
not say how utterly distressed I was to see these children at Reading,
for I knew the treatment in store for them. The cruelty that is
practised by day and night on children in English prisons is incredible,
except to those who have witnessed it and are aware of the brutality of
the system.

People nowadays do not understand what cruelty is. They regard it as a
sort of terrible mediæval passion, and connect it with the race of men
like Eccelin da Romano, and others, to whom the deliberate infliction of
pain gave a real madness of pleasure. But men of the stamp of Eccelin
are merely abnormal types of perverted individualism. Ordinary cruelty
is simply stupidity. It comes from the entire want of imagination. It is
the result in our days of stereotyped systems, of hard-and-fast rules,
of centralisation, of officialism, and of irresponsible authority.
Wherever there is centralisation there is stupidity. What is inhuman in
modern life is officialism. Authority is as destructive to those who
exercise it as it is to those on whom it is exercised. It is the Prison
Board, with the system that it carries out, that is the primary source
of the cruelty that is exercised on a child in prison. The people who
uphold the system have excellent intentions. Those who carry it out are
humane in intention also. Responsibility is shifted on to the
disciplinary regulations. It is supposed that because a thing is the
rule it is right.

The present treatment of children is terrible, primarily from people not
understanding the peculiar psychology of a child's nature. A child can
understand a punishment inflicted by an individual, such as a parent or
guardian, and bear it with a certain amount of acquiescence. What it
cannot understand is a punishment inflicted by Society. It cannot
realise what Society is. With grown people it is, of course, the
reverse. Those of us who are either in prison or have been sent there,
can understand, and do understand, what that collective force called
Society means, and whatever we may think of its methods or claims, we
can force ourselves to accept it. Punishment inflicted on us by an
individual, on the other hand, is a thing that no grown person endures
or is expected to endure.

The child consequently, being taken away from its parents by people whom
it has never seen, and of whom it knows nothing, and finding itself in
a lonely and unfamiliar cell, waited on by strange faces, and ordered
about and punished by the representatives of a system that it cannot
understand, becomes an immediate prey to the first and most prominent
emotion produced by modern prison life--the emotion of terror. The
terror of a child in prison is quite limitless. I remember once in
Reading, as I was going out to exercise, seeing in the dimly-lit cell,
right opposite my own, a small boy. Two warders, not unkindly men, were
talking to him, with some sternness apparently, or perhaps giving him
some useful advice about his conduct. One was in the cell with him, the
other was standing outside. The child's face was like a white wedge of
sheer terror. There was in his eyes the mute appeal of a hunted animal.
The next morning I heard him at breakfast-time crying, and calling to be
let out. His cry was for his parents. From time to time I could hear the
deep voice of the warder on duty warning him to keep quiet. Yet he was
not even convicted of whatever little offence he had been charged with.
He was simply on remand. That I knew by his wearing his own clothes,
which seemed neat enough. He was, however, wearing prison socks and
shoes. This showed that he was a very poor boy, whose own shoes, if he
had any, were in a bad state. Justices and magistrates, an entirely
ignorant class as a rule, often remand children for a week, and then
perhaps remit whatever sentence they are entitled to pass. They call
this "not sending a child to prison." It is, of course, a stupid view on
their part. To a little child, whether he is in prison on remand or
after conviction, is a subtlety of social position he cannot comprehend.
To him the horrible thing is to be there at all. In the eyes of humanity
it should be a horrible thing for him to be there at all.

This terror that seizes and dominates the child, as it seizes the grown
man also, is of course intensified beyond power of expression by the
solitary cellular system of our prisons. Every child is confined to its
cell for twenty-three hours out of the twenty-four. This is the
appalling thing. To shut up a child in a dimly-lit cell for twenty-three
hours out of the twenty-four is an example of the cruelty of stupidity.
If an individual, parent or guardian, did this to a child he would be
severely punished. The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children
would take the matter up at once. There would be on all hands the utmost
detestation of whomsoever had been guilty of such cruelty. A heavy
sentence would undoubtedly follow conviction. But our own actual society
does worse itself, and to the child to be so treated by a strange
abstract force, of whose claims it has no cognizance, is much worse than
it would be to receive the same treatment from its father or mother, or
someone it knew. The inhuman treatment of a child is always inhuman, by
whomsoever it is inflicted. But inhuman treatment by Society is to the
child the more terrible because there is no appeal. A parent or guardian
can be moved, and let out the child from the dark lonely room in which
it is confined. But a warder cannot. Most warders are very fond of
children. But the system prohibits them from rendering the child any
assistance. Should they do so, as Warder Martin did, they are dismissed.

The second thing from which a child suffers in prison is hunger. The
food that is given to it consists of a piece of usually badly-baked
prison bread and a tin of water for breakfast at half-past seven. At
twelve o'clock it gets dinner, composed of a tin of coarse Indian meal
stirabout, and at half-past five it gets a piece of dry bread and a tin
of water for its supper. This diet in the case of a strong grown man is
always productive of illness of some kind, chiefly of course
diarrhoea, with its attendant weakness. In fact in a big prison
astringent medicines are served out regularly by the warders as a matter
of course. In the case of a child, the child is, as a rule, incapable of
eating the food at all. Anyone who knows anything about children knows
how easily a child's digestion is upset by a fit of crying, or trouble
and mental distress of any kind. A child who has been crying all day
long, and perhaps half the night, in a lonely dimly-lit cell, and is
preyed upon by terror, simply cannot eat food of this coarse, horrible
kind. In the case of the little child to whom Warder Martin gave the
biscuits, the child was crying with hunger on Tuesday morning, and
utterly unable to eat the bread and water served to it for its
breakfast. Martin went out after the breakfasts had been served and
bought the few sweet biscuits for the child rather than see it starving.
It was a beautiful action on his part, and was so recognised by the
child, who, utterly unconscious of the regulation of the Prison Board,
told one of the senior warders how kind this junior warder had been to
him. The result was, of course, a report and a dismissal.

I know Martin extremely well, and I was under his charge for the last
seven weeks of my imprisonment. On his appointment at Reading he had
charge of Gallery C, in which I was confined, so I saw him constantly. I
was struck by the singular kindness and humanity of the way in which he
spoke to me and to the other prisoners. Kind words are much in prison,
and a pleasant "Good morning" or "Good evening" will make one as happy
as one can be in solitary confinement. He was always gentle and
considerate. I happen to know another case in which he showed great
kindness to one of the prisoners, and I have no hesitation in mentioning
it. One of the most horrible things in prison is the badness of the
sanitary arrangements. No prisoner is allowed under any circumstances to
leave his cell after half-past five p.m. If, consequently, he is
suffering from diarrhoea, he has to use his cell as a latrine, and
pass the night in a most fetid and unwholesome atmosphere. Some days
before my release Martin was going the rounds at half-past seven with
one of the senior warders for the purpose of collecting the oakum and
tools of the prisoners. A man just convicted, and suffering from
violent diarrhoea in consequence of the food, as is always the case,
asked this senior warder to allow him to empty the slops in his cell on
account of the horrible odour of the cell and the possibility of illness
again in the night. The senior warder refused absolutely; it was against
the rules. The man, as far as he was concerned, had to pass the night in
this dreadful condition. Martin, however, rather than see this wretched
man in such a loathsome predicament, said he would empty the man's slops
himself, and did so. A warder emptying a prisoner's slops is, of course,
against the rules, but Martin did this act of kindness to the man out of
the simple humanity of his nature, and the man was naturally most
grateful.

As regards the children, a great deal has been talked and written lately
about the contaminating influence of prison on young children. What is
said is quite true. A child is utterly contaminated by prison life. But
the contaminating influence is not that of the prisoners. It is that of
the whole prison system--of the governor, the chaplain, the warders, the
lonely cell, the isolation, the revolting food, the rules of the Prison
Commissioners, the mode of discipline as it is termed, of the life.
Every care is taken to isolate a child from the sight even of all
prisoners over sixteen years of age. Children sit behind a curtain in
chapel, and are sent to take exercise in small sunless yards--sometimes
a stone-yard, sometimes a yard at the back of the mills--rather than
that they should see the elder prisoners at exercise. But the only
really humanising influence in prison is the influence of the prisoners.
Their cheerfulness under terrible circumstances, their sympathy for each
other, their humility, their gentleness, their pleasant smiles of
greeting when they meet each other, their complete acquiescence in their
punishments, are all quite wonderful, and I myself learnt many sound
lessons from them. I am not proposing that the children should not sit
behind a curtain in chapel, or that they should take exercise in a
corner of the common yard. I am merely pointing out that the bad
influence on children is not, and could never be, that of the prisoners,
but is, and will always remain, that of the prison system itself. There
is not a single man in Reading Gaol that would not gladly have done the
three children's punishment for them. When I saw them last it was on the
Tuesday following their conviction. I was taking exercise at half-past
eleven with about twelve other men, as the three children passed near
us, in charge of a warder, from the damp, dreary stone-yard in which
they had been at their exercise. I saw the greatest pity and sympathy in
the eyes of my companions as they looked at them. Prisoners are, as a
class, extremely kind and sympathetic to each other. Suffering and the
community of suffering makes people kind, and day after day as I tramped
the yard I used to feel with pleasure and comfort what Carlyle calls
somewhere "the silent rhythmic charm of human companionship." In this as
in all other things, philanthropists and people of that kind are astray.
It is not the prisoners who need reformation. It is the prisons.

Of course no child under fourteen years of age should be sent to prison
at all. It is an absurdity, and, like many absurdities, of absolutely
tragic results. If, however, they are to be sent to prison, during the
daytime they should be in a workshop or schoolroom with a warder. At
night they should sleep in a dormitory, with a night-warder to look
after them. They should be allowed exercise for at least three hours a
day. The dark, badly-ventilated, ill-smelling prison cells are dreadful
for a child, dreadful indeed for anyone. One is always breathing bad air
in prison. The food given to children should consist of tea and
bread-and-butter and soup. Prison soup is very good and wholesome. A
resolution of the House of Commons could settle the treatment of
children in half an hour. I hope you will use your influence to have
this done. The way that children are treated at present is really an
outrage on humanity and common-sense. It comes from stupidity.

Let me draw attention now to another terrible thing that goes on in
English prisons, indeed in prisons all over the world where the system
of silence and cellular confinement is practised. I refer to the large
number of men who become insane or weak-minded in prison. In convict
prisons this is, of course, quite common; but in ordinary gaols also,
such as that I was confined in, it is to be found.

About three months ago, I noticed amongst the prisoners who took
exercise with me a young man who seemed to me to be silly or
half-witted. Every prison of course has its half-witted clients, who
return again and again, and may be said to live in the prison. But this
young man struck me as being more than usually half-witted on account of
his silly grin and idiotic laughter to himself, and the peculiar
restlessness of his eternally twitching hands. He was noticed by all the
other prisoners on account of the strangeness of his conduct. From time
to time he did not appear at exercise, which showed me that he was being
punished by confinement to his cell. Finally, I discovered that he was
under observation, and being watched night and day by warders. When he
did appear at exercise, he always seemed hysterical, and used to walk
round crying or laughing. At chapel he had to sit right under the
observation of two warders, who carefully watched him all the time.
Sometimes he would bury his head in his hands, an offence against the
chapel regulations, and his head would be immediately struck up by a
warder, so that he should keep his eyes fixed permanently in the
direction of the Communion-table. Sometimes he would cry--not making any
disturbance--but with tears streaming down his face and a hysterical
throbbing in the throat. Sometimes he would grin idiot-like to himself
and make faces. He was on more than one occasion sent out of chapel to
his cell, and of course he was continually punished. As the bench on
which I used to sit in chapel was directly behind the bench at the end
of which this unfortunate man was placed, I had full opportunity of
observing him. I also saw him, of course, at exercise continually, and I
saw that he was becoming insane, and was being treated as if he was
shamming.

On Saturday week last, I was in my cell at about one o'clock occupied in
cleaning and polishing the tins I had been using for dinner. Suddenly I
was startled by the prison silence being broken by the most horrible and
revolting shrieks or rather howls, for at first I thought some animal
like a bull or a cow was being unskilfully slaughtered outside the
prison walls. I soon realised, however, that the howls proceeded from
the basement of the prison, and I knew that some wretched man was being
flogged. I need not say how hideous and terrible it was for me, and I
began to wonder who it was who was being punished in this revolting
manner. Suddenly it dawned upon me that they might be flogging this
unfortunate lunatic. My feelings on the subject need not be chronicled;
they have nothing to do with the question.

The next day, Sunday 16th, I saw the poor fellow at exercise, his weak,
ugly, wretched face bloated by tears and hysteria almost beyond
recognition. He walked in the centre ring along with the old men, the
beggars and the lame people, so that I was able to observe him the whole
time. It was my last Sunday in prison, a perfectly lovely day, the
finest day we had had the whole year, and there, in the beautiful
sunlight, walked this poor creature--made once in the image of
God--grinning like an ape, and making with his hands the most fantastic
gestures, as though he was playing in the air on some invisible stringed
instrument, or arranging and dealing counters in some curious game. All
the while these hysterical tears, without which none of us ever saw
him, were making soiled runnels on his white swollen face. The hideous
and deliberate grace of his gestures made him like an antic. He was a
living grotesque. The other prisoners all watched him, and not one of
them smiled. Everybody knew what had happened to him, and that he was
being driven insane--was insane already. After half-an-hour, he was
ordered in by the warder, and, I suppose, punished. At least he was not
at exercise on Monday, though I think I caught sight of him at the
corner of the stone-yard, walking in charge of a warder.

On the Tuesday--my last day in prison--I saw him at exercise. He was
worse than before, and again was sent in. Since then I know nothing of
him, but I found out from one of the prisoners who walked with me at
exercise that he had had twenty-four lashes in the cook-house on
Saturday afternoon, by order of the visiting justices on the report of
the doctor. The howls that had horrified us all were his.

This man is undoubtedly becoming insane. Prison doctors have no
knowledge of mental disease of any kind. They are as a class ignorant
men. The pathology of the mind is unknown to them. When a man grows
insane, they treat him as shamming. They have him punished again and
again. Naturally the man becomes worse. When ordinary punishments are
exhausted, the doctor reports the case to the justices. The result is
flogging. Of course the flogging is not done with a cat-of-nine-tails.
It is what is called birching. The instrument is a rod; but the result
on the wretched half-witted man may be imagined.

His number is, or was, A. 2. 11. I also managed to find out his name. It
is Prince. Something should be done at once for him. He is a soldier,
and his sentence is one of court-martial. The term is six months. Three
have yet to run.

May I ask you to use your influence to have this case examined into, and
to see that the lunatic prisoner is properly treated?

No report by the Medical Commissioners is of any avail. It is not to be
trusted. The medical inspectors do not seem to understand the difference
between idiocy and lunacy--between the entire absence of a function or
organ and the diseases of a function or organ. This man A. 2. 11, will,
I have no doubt, be able to tell his name, the nature of his offence,
the day of the month, the date of the beginning and expiration of his
sentence, and answer any ordinary simple question; but that his mind is
diseased admits of no doubt. At present it is a horrible duel between
himself and the doctor. The doctor is fighting for a theory. The man is
fighting for his life. I am anxious that the man should win. But let the
whole case be examined into by experts who understand brain-disease, and
by people of humane feelings who have still some common-sense and some
pity. There is no reason that the sentimentalist should be asked to
interfere. He always does harm. He culminates at his starting point. His
end, as his origin, is an emotion.

The case is a special instance of the cruelty inseparable from a stupid
system, for the present Governor of Reading is a man of gentle and
humane character, greatly liked and respected by all the prisoners. He
was appointed in July last, and though he cannot alter the rules of the
prison system, he has altered the spirit in which they used to be
carried out under his predecessor. He is very popular with the prisoners
and with the warders. Indeed he has quite elevated the whole tone of the
prison-life. Upon the other hand, the system is of course beyond his
reach as far as altering its rules is concerned. I have no doubt that he
sees daily much of what he knows to be unjust, stupid, and cruel. But
his hands are tied. Of course I have no knowledge of his real views of
the case of A. 2. 11, nor, indeed, of any of his views on our present
system. I merely judge him by the complete change he brought about in
Reading Prison. Under his predecessor the system was carried out with
the greatest harshness and stupidity.--I remain, Sir, your obedient
servant,

 
DE PROFUNDIS


. . . Suffering is one very long moment.  We cannot divide it by seasons.
We can only record its moods, and chronicle their return.  With us time
itself does not progress.  It revolves.  It seems to circle round one
centre of pain.  The paralysing immobility of a life every circumstance
of which is regulated after an unchangeable pattern, so that we eat and
drink and lie down and pray, or kneel at least for prayer, according to
the inflexible laws of an iron formula: this immobile quality, that makes
each dreadful day in the very minutest detail like its brother, seems to
communicate itself to those external forces the very essence of whose
existence is ceaseless change.  Of seed-time or harvest, of the reapers
bending over the corn, or the grape gatherers threading through the
vines, of the grass in the orchard made white with broken blossoms or
strewn with fallen fruit: of these we know nothing and can know nothing.

For us there is only one season, the season of sorrow.  The very sun and
moon seem taken from us.  Outside, the day may be blue and gold, but the
light that creeps down through the thickly-muffled glass of the small
iron-barred window beneath which one sits is grey and niggard.  It is
always twilight in one's cell, as it is always twilight in one's heart.
And in the sphere of thought, no less than in the sphere of time, motion
is no more.  The thing that you personally have long ago forgotten, or
can easily forget, is happening to me now, and will happen to me again to-
morrow.  Remember this, and you will be able to understand a little of
why I am writing, and in this manner writing. . . .

A week later, I am transferred here.  Three more months go over and my
mother dies.  No one knew how deeply I loved and honoured her.  Her death
was terrible to me; but I, once a lord of language, have no words in
which to express my anguish and my shame.  She and my father had
bequeathed me a name they had made noble and honoured, not merely in
literature, art, archaeology, and science, but in the public history of
my own country, in its evolution as a nation.  I had disgraced that name
eternally.  I had made it a low by-word among low people.  I had dragged
it through the very mire.  I had given it to brutes that they might make
it brutal, and to fools that they might turn it into a synonym for folly.
What I suffered then, and still suffer, is not for pen to write or paper
to record.  My wife, always kind and gentle to me, rather than that I
should hear the news from indifferent lips, travelled, ill as she was,
all the way from Genoa to England to break to me herself the tidings of
so irreparable, so irremediable, a loss.  Messages of sympathy reached me
from all who had still affection for me.  Even people who had not known
me personally, hearing that a new sorrow had broken into my life, wrote
to ask that some expression of their condolence should be conveyed to me.
. . .

Three months go over.  The calendar of my daily conduct and labour that
hangs on the outside of my cell door, with my name and sentence written
upon it, tells me that it is May. . . .

Prosperity, pleasure and success, may be rough of grain and common in
fibre, but sorrow is the most sensitive of all created things.  There is
nothing that stirs in the whole world of thought to which sorrow does not
vibrate in terrible and exquisite pulsation.  The thin beaten-out leaf of
tremulous gold that chronicles the direction of forces the eye cannot see
is in comparison coarse.  It is a wound that bleeds when any hand but
that of love touches it, and even then must bleed again, though not in
pain.

Where there is sorrow there is holy ground.  Some day people will realise
what that means.  They will know nothing of life till they do,--and
natures like his can realise it.  When I was brought down from my prison
to the Court of Bankruptcy, between two policemen,--waited in the long
dreary corridor that, before the whole crowd, whom an action so sweet and
simple hushed into silence, he might gravely raise his hat to me, as,
handcuffed and with bowed head, I passed him by.  Men have gone to heaven
for smaller things than that.  It was in this spirit, and with this mode
of love, that the saints knelt down to wash the feet of the poor, or
stooped to kiss the leper on the cheek.  I have never said one single
word to him about what he did.  I do not know to the present moment
whether he is aware that I was even conscious of his action.  It is not a
thing for which one can render formal thanks in formal words.  I store it
in the treasure-house of my heart.  I keep it there as a secret debt that
I am glad to think I can never possibly repay.  It is embalmed and kept
sweet by the myrrh and cassia of many tears.  When wisdom has been
profitless to me, philosophy barren, and the proverbs and phrases of
those who have sought to give me consolation as dust and ashes in my
mouth, the memory of that little, lovely, silent act of love has unsealed
for me all the wells of pity: made the desert blossom like a rose, and
brought me out of the bitterness of lonely exile into harmony with the
wounded, broken, and great heart of the world.  When people are able to
understand, not merely how beautiful ---'s action was, but why it meant
so much to me, and always will mean so much, then, perhaps, they will
realise how and in what spirit they should approach me. . . .

The poor are wise, more charitable, more kind, more sensitive than we
are.  In their eyes prison is a tragedy in a man's life, a misfortune, a
casuality, something that calls for sympathy in others.  They speak of
one who is in prison as of one who is 'in trouble' simply.  It is the
phrase they always use, and the expression has the perfect wisdom of love
in it.  With people of our own rank it is different.  With us, prison
makes a man a pariah.  I, and such as I am, have hardly any right to air
and sun.  Our presence taints the pleasures of others.  We are unwelcome
when we reappear.  To revisit the glimpses of the moon is not for us.  Our
very children are taken away.  Those lovely links with humanity are
broken.  We are doomed to be solitary, while our sons still live.  We are
denied the one thing that might heal us and keep us, that might bring
balm to the bruised heart, and peace to the soul in pain. . . .

I must say to myself that I ruined myself, and that nobody great or small
can be ruined except by his own hand.  I am quite ready to say so.  I am
trying to say so, though they may not think it at the present moment.
This pitiless indictment I bring without pity against myself.  Terrible
as was what the world did to me, what I did to myself was far more
terrible still.

I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my
age.  I had realised this for myself at the very dawn of my manhood, and
had forced my age to realise it afterwards.  Few men hold such a position
in their own lifetime, and have it so acknowledged.  It is usually
discerned, if discerned at all, by the historian, or the critic, long
after both the man and his age have passed away.  With me it was
different.  I felt it myself, and made others feel it.  Byron was a
symbolic figure, but his relations were to the passion of his age and its
weariness of passion.  Mine were to something more noble, more permanent,
of more vital issue, of larger scope.

The gods had given me almost everything.  But I let myself be lured into
long spells of senseless and sensual ease.  I amused myself with being a
_flaneur_, a dandy, a man of fashion.  I surrounded myself with the
smaller natures and the meaner minds.  I became the spendthrift of my own
genius, and to waste an eternal youth gave me a curious joy.  Tired of
being on the heights, I deliberately went to the depths in the search for
new sensation.  What the paradox was to me in the sphere of thought,
perversity became to me in the sphere of passion.  Desire, at the end,
was a malady, or a madness, or both.  I grew careless of the lives of
others.  I took pleasure where it pleased me, and passed on.  I forgot
that every little action of the common day makes or unmakes character,
and that therefore what one has done in the secret chamber one has some
day to cry aloud on the housetop.  I ceased to be lord over myself.  I
was no longer the captain of my soul, and did not know it.  I allowed
pleasure to dominate me.  I ended in horrible disgrace.  There is only
one thing for me now, absolute humility.

I have lain in prison for nearly two years.  Out of my nature has come
wild despair; an abandonment to grief that was piteous even to look at;
terrible and impotent rage; bitterness and scorn; anguish that wept
aloud; misery that could find no voice; sorrow that was dumb.  I have
passed through every possible mood of suffering.  Better than Wordsworth
himself I know what Wordsworth meant when he said--

But while there were times when I rejoiced in the idea that my sufferings
were to be endless, I could not bear them to be without meaning.  Now I
find hidden somewhere away in my nature something that tells me that
nothing in the whole world is meaningless, and suffering least of all.
That something hidden away in my nature, like a treasure in a field, is
Humility.

It is the last thing left in me, and the best: the ultimate discovery at
which I have arrived, the starting-point for a fresh development.  It has
come to me right out of myself, so I know that it has come at the proper
time.  It could not have come before, nor later.  Had any one told me of
it, I would have rejected it.  Had it been brought to me, I would have
refused it.  As I found it, I want to keep it.  I must do so.  It is the
one thing that has in it the elements of life, of a new life, _Vita
Nuova_ for me.  Of all things it is the strangest.  One cannot acquire
it, except by surrendering everything that one has.  It is only when one
has lost all things, that one knows that one possesses it.

Now I have realised that it is in me, I see quite clearly what I ought to
do; in fact, must do.  And when I use such a phrase as that, I need not
say that I am not alluding to any external sanction or command.  I admit
none.  I am far more of an individualist than I ever was.  Nothing seems
to me of the smallest value except what one gets out of oneself.  My
nature is seeking a fresh mode of self-realisation.  That is all I am
concerned with.  And the first thing that I have got to do is to free
myself from any possible bitterness of feeling against the world.

I am completely penniless, and absolutely homeless.  Yet there are worse
things in the world than that.  I am quite candid when I say that rather
than go out from this prison with bitterness in my heart against the
world, I would gladly and readily beg my bread from door to door.  If I
got nothing from the house of the rich I would get something at the house
of the poor.  Those who have much are often greedy; those who have little
always share.  I would not a bit mind sleeping in the cool grass in
summer, and when winter came on sheltering myself by the warm
close-thatched rick, or under the penthouse of a great barn, provided I
had love in my heart.  The external things of life seem to me now of no
importance at all.  You can see to what intensity of individualism I have
arrived--or am arriving rather, for the journey is long, and 'where I
walk there are thorns.'

Of course I know that to ask alms on the highway is not to be my lot, and
that if ever I lie in the cool grass at night-time it will be to write
sonnets to the moon.  When I go out of prison, R--- will be waiting for
me on the other side of the big iron-studded gate, and he is the symbol,
not merely of his own affection, but of the affection of many others
besides.  I believe I am to have enough to live on for about eighteen
months at any rate, so that if I may not write beautiful books, I may at
least read beautiful books; and what joy can be greater?  After that, I
hope to be able to recreate my creative faculty.

But were things different: had I not a friend left in the world; were
there not a single house open to me in pity; had I to accept the wallet
and ragged cloak of sheer penury: as long as I am free from all
resentment, hardness and scorn, I would be able to face the life with
much more calm and confidence than I would were my body in purple and
fine linen, and the soul within me sick with hate.

And I really shall have no difficulty.  When you really want love you
will find it waiting for you.

I need not say that my task does not end there.  It would be
comparatively easy if it did.  There is much more before me.  I have
hills far steeper to climb, valleys much darker to pass through.  And I
have to get it all out of myself.  Neither religion, morality, nor reason
can help me at all.

Morality does not help me.  I am a born antinomian.  I am one of those
who are made for exceptions, not for laws.  But while I see that there is
nothing wrong in what one does, I see that there is something wrong in
what one becomes.  It is well to have learned that.

Religion does not help me.  The faith that others give to what is unseen,
I give to what one can touch, and look at.  My gods dwell in temples made
with hands; and within the circle of actual experience is my creed made
perfect and complete: too complete, it may be, for like many or all of
those who have placed their heaven in this earth, I have found in it not
merely the beauty of heaven, but the horror of hell also.  When I think
about religion at all, I feel as if I would like to found an order for
those who _cannot_ believe: the Confraternity of the Faithless, one might
call it, where on an altar, on which no taper burned, a priest, in whose
heart peace had no dwelling, might celebrate with unblessed bread and a
chalice empty of wine.  Every thing to be true must become a religion.
And agnosticism should have its ritual no less than faith.  It has sown
its martyrs, it should reap its saints, and praise God daily for having
hidden Himself from man.  But whether it be faith or agnosticism, it must
be nothing external to me.  Its symbols must be of my own creating.  Only
that is spiritual which makes its own form.  If I may not find its secret
within myself, I shall never find it: if I have not got it already, it
will never come to me.

Reason does not help me.  It tells me that the laws under which I am
convicted are wrong and unjust laws, and the system under which I have
suffered a wrong and unjust system.  But, somehow, I have got to make
both of these things just and right to me.  And exactly as in Art one is
only concerned with what a particular thing is at a particular moment to
oneself, so it is also in the ethical evolution of one's character.  I
have got to make everything that has happened to me good for me.  The
plank bed, the loathsome food, the hard ropes shredded into oakum till
one's finger-tips grow dull with pain, the menial offices with which each
day begins and finishes, the harsh orders that routine seems to
necessitate, the dreadful dress that makes sorrow grotesque to look at,
the silence, the solitude, the shame--each and all of these things I have
to transform into a spiritual experience.  There is not a single
degradation of the body which I must not try and make into a
spiritualising of the soul.

I want to get to the point when I shall be able to say quite simply, and
without affectation that the two great turning-points in my life were
when my father sent me to Oxford, and when society sent me to prison.  I
will not say that prison is the best thing that could have happened to
me: for that phrase would savour of too great bitterness towards myself.
I would sooner say, or hear it said of me, that I was so typical a child
of my age, that in my perversity, and for that perversity's sake, I
turned the good things of my life to evil, and the evil things of my life
to good.

What is said, however, by myself or by others, matters little.  The
important thing, the thing that lies before me, the thing that I have to
do, if the brief remainder of my days is not to be maimed, marred, and
incomplete, is to absorb into my nature all that has been done to me, to
make it part of me, to accept it without complaint, fear, or reluctance.
The supreme vice is shallowness.  Whatever is realised is right.

When first I was put into prison some people advised me to try and forget
who I was.  It was ruinous advice.  It is only by realising what I am
that I have found comfort of any kind.  Now I am advised by others to try
on my release to forget that I have ever been in a prison at all.  I know
that would be equally fatal.  It would mean that I would always be
haunted by an intolerable sense of disgrace, and that those things that
are meant for me as much as for anybody else--the beauty of the sun and
moon, the pageant of the seasons, the music of daybreak and the silence
of great nights, the rain falling through the leaves, or the dew creeping
over the grass and making it silver--would all be tainted for me, and
lose their healing power, and their power of communicating joy.  To
regret one's own experiences is to arrest one's own development.  To deny
one's own experiences is to put a lie into the lips of one's own life.  It
is no less than a denial of the soul.

For just as the body absorbs things of all kinds, things common and
unclean no less than those that the priest or a vision has cleansed, and
converts them into swiftness or strength, into the play of beautiful
muscles and the moulding of fair flesh, into the curves and colours of
the hair, the lips, the eye; so the soul in its turn has its nutritive
functions also, and can transform into noble moods of thought and
passions of high import what in itself is base, cruel and degrading; nay,
more, may find in these its most august modes of assertion, and can often
reveal itself most perfectly through what was intended to desecrate or
destroy.

The fact of my having been the common prisoner of a common gaol I must
frankly accept, and, curious as it may seem, one of the things I shall
have to teach myself is not to be ashamed of it.  I must accept it as a
punishment, and if one is ashamed of having been punished, one might just
as well never have been punished at all.  Of course there are many things
of which I was convicted that I had not done, but then there are many
things of which I was convicted that I had done, and a still greater
number of things in my life for which I was never indicted at all.  And
as the gods are strange, and punish us for what is good and humane in us
as much as for what is evil and perverse, I must accept the fact that one
is punished for the good as well as for the evil that one does.  I have
no doubt that it is quite right one should be.  It helps one, or should
help one, to realise both, and not to be too conceited about either.  And
if I then am not ashamed of my punishment, as I hope not to be, I shall
be able to think, and walk, and live with freedom.

Many men on their release carry their prison about with them into the
air, and hide it as a secret disgrace in their hearts, and at length,
like poor poisoned things, creep into some hole and die.  It is wretched
that they should have to do so, and it is wrong, terribly wrong, of
society that it should force them to do so.  Society takes upon itself
the right to inflict appalling punishment on the individual, but it also
has the supreme vice of shallowness, and fails to realise what it has
done.  When the man's punishment is over, it leaves him to himself; that
is to say, it abandons him at the very moment when its highest duty
towards him begins.  It is really ashamed of its own actions, and shuns
those whom it has punished, as people shun a creditor whose debt they
cannot pay, or one on whom they have inflicted an irreparable, an
irremediable wrong.  I can claim on my side that if I realise what I have
suffered, society should realise what it has inflicted on me; and that
there should be no bitterness or hate on either side.

Of course I know that from one point of view things will be made
different for me than for others; must indeed, by the very nature of the
case, be made so.  The poor thieves and outcasts who are imprisoned here
with me are in many respects more fortunate than I am.  The little way in
grey city or green field that saw their sin is small; to find those who
know nothing of what they have done they need go no further than a bird
might fly between the twilight and the dawn; but for me the world is
shrivelled to a handsbreadth, and everywhere I turn my name is written on
the rocks in lead.  For I have come, not from obscurity into the
momentary notoriety of crime, but from a sort of eternity of fame to a
sort of eternity of infamy, and sometimes seem to myself to have shown,
if indeed it required showing, that between the famous and the infamous
there is but one step, if as much as one.

Still, in the very fact that people will recognise me wherever I go, and
know all about my life, as far as its follies go, I can discern something
good for me.  It will force on me the necessity of again asserting myself
as an artist, and as soon as I possibly can.  If I can produce only one
beautiful work of art I shall be able to rob malice of its venom, and
cowardice of its sneer, and to pluck out the tongue of scorn by the
roots.

And if life be, as it surely is, a problem to me, I am no less a problem
to life.  People must adopt some attitude towards me, and so pass
judgment, both on themselves and me.  I need not say I am not talking of
particular individuals.  The only people I would care to be with now are
artists and people who have suffered: those who know what beauty is, and
those who know what sorrow is: nobody else interests me.  Nor am I making
any demands on life.  In all that I have said I am simply concerned with
my own mental attitude towards life as a whole; and I feel that not to be
ashamed of having been punished is one of the first points I must attain
to, for the sake of my own perfection, and because I am so imperfect.

Then I must learn how to be happy.  Once I knew it, or thought I knew it,
by instinct.  It was always springtime once in my heart.  My temperament
was akin to joy.  I filled my life to the very brim with pleasure, as one
might fill a cup to the very brim with wine.  Now I am approaching life
from a completely new standpoint, and even to conceive happiness is often
extremely difficult for me.  I remember during my first term at Oxford
reading in Pater's _Renaissance_--that book which has had such strange
influence over my life--how Dante places low in the Inferno those who
wilfully live in sadness; and going to the college library and turning to
the passage in the _Divine Comedy_ where beneath the dreary marsh lie
those who were 'sullen in the sweet air,' saying for ever and ever
through their sighs--

I knew the church condemned _accidia_, but the whole idea seemed to me
quite fantastic, just the sort of sin, I fancied, a priest who knew
nothing about real life would invent.  Nor could I understand how Dante,
who says that 'sorrow remarries us to God,' could have been so harsh to
those who were enamoured of melancholy, if any such there really were.  I
had no idea that some day this would become to me one of the greatest
temptations of my life.

While I was in Wandsworth prison I longed to die.  It was my one desire.
When after two months in the infirmary I was transferred here, and found
myself growing gradually better in physical health, I was filled with
rage.  I determined to commit suicide on the very day on which I left
prison.  After a time that evil mood passed away, and I made up my mind
to live, but to wear gloom as a king wears purple: never to smile again:
to turn whatever house I entered into a house of mourning: to make my
friends walk slowly in sadness with me: to teach them that melancholy is
the true secret of life: to maim them with an alien sorrow: to mar them
with my own pain.  Now I feel quite differently.  I see it would be both
ungrateful and unkind of me to pull so long a face that when my friends
came to see me they would have to make their faces still longer in order
to show their sympathy; or, if I desired to entertain them, to invite
them to sit down silently to bitter herbs and funeral baked meats.  I
must learn how to be cheerful and happy.

The last two occasions on which I was allowed to see my friends here, I
tried to be as cheerful as possible, and to show my cheerfulness, in
order to make them some slight return for their trouble in coming all the
way from town to see me.  It is only a slight return, I know, but it is
the one, I feel certain, that pleases them most.  I saw R--- for an hour
on Saturday week, and I tried to give the fullest possible expression of
the delight I really felt at our meeting.  And that, in the views and
ideas I am here shaping for myself, I am quite right is shown to me by
the fact that now for the first time since my imprisonment I have a real
desire for life.

There is before me so much to do, that I would regard it as a terrible
tragedy if I died before I was allowed to complete at any rate a little
of it.  I see new developments in art and life, each one of which is a
fresh mode of perfection.  I long to live so that I can explore what is
no less than a new world to me.  Do you want to know what this new world
is?  I think you can guess what it is.  It is the world in which I have
been living.  Sorrow, then, and all that it teaches one, is my new world.

I used to live entirely for pleasure.  I shunned suffering and sorrow of
every kind.  I hated both.  I resolved to ignore them as far as possible:
to treat them, that is to say, as modes of imperfection.  They were not
part of my scheme of life.  They had no place in my philosophy.  My
mother, who knew life as a whole, used often to quote to me Goethe's
lines--written by Carlyle in a book he had given her years ago, and
translated by him, I fancy, also:--

They were the lines which that noble Queen of Prussia, whom Napoleon
treated with such coarse brutality, used to quote in her humiliation and
exile; they were the lines my mother often quoted in the troubles of her
later life.  I absolutely declined to accept or admit the enormous truth
hidden in them.  I could not understand it.  I remember quite well how I
used to tell her that I did not want to eat my bread in sorrow, or to
pass any night weeping and watching for a more bitter dawn.

I had no idea that it was one of the special things that the Fates had in
store for me: that for a whole year of my life, indeed, I was to do
little else.  But so has my portion been meted out to me; and during the
last few months I have, after terrible difficulties and struggles, been
able to comprehend some of the lessons hidden in the heart of pain.
Clergymen and people who use phrases without wisdom sometimes talk of
suffering as a mystery.  It is really a revelation.  One discerns things
one never discerned before.  One approaches the whole of history from a
different standpoint.  What one had felt dimly, through instinct, about
art, is intellectually and emotionally realised with perfect clearness of
vision and absolute intensity of apprehension.

I now see that sorrow, being the supreme emotion of which man is capable,
is at once the type and test of all great art.  What the artist is always
looking for is the mode of existence in which soul and body are one and
indivisible: in which the outward is expressive of the inward: in which
form reveals.  Of such modes of existence there are not a few: youth and
the arts preoccupied with youth may serve as a model for us at one
moment: at another we may like to think that, in its subtlety and
sensitiveness of impression, its suggestion of a spirit dwelling in
external things and making its raiment of earth and air, of mist and city
alike, and in its morbid sympathy of its moods, and tones, and colours,
modern landscape art is realising for us pictorially what was realised in
such plastic perfection by the Greeks.  Music, in which all subject is
absorbed in expression and cannot be separated from it, is a complex
example, and a flower or a child a simple example, of what I mean; but
sorrow is the ultimate type both in life and art.

Behind joy and laughter there may be a temperament, coarse, hard and
callous.  But behind sorrow there is always sorrow.  Pain, unlike
pleasure, wears no mask.  Truth in art is not any correspondence between
the essential idea and the accidental existence; it is not the
resemblance of shape to shadow, or of the form mirrored in the crystal to
the form itself; it is no echo coming from a hollow hill, any more than
it is a silver well of water in the valley that shows the moon to the
moon and Narcissus to Narcissus.  Truth in art is the unity of a thing
with itself: the outward rendered expressive of the inward: the soul made
incarnate: the body instinct with spirit.  For this reason there is no
truth comparable to sorrow.  There are times when sorrow seems to me to
be the only truth.  Other things may be illusions of the eye or the
appetite, made to blind the one and cloy the other, but out of sorrow
have the worlds been built, and at the birth of a child or a star there
is pain.

More than this, there is about sorrow an intense, an extraordinary
reality.  I have said of myself that I was one who stood in symbolic
relations to the art and culture of my age.  There is not a single
wretched man in this wretched place along with me who does not stand in
symbolic relation to the very secret of life.  For the secret of life is
suffering.  It is what is hidden behind everything.  When we begin to
live, what is sweet is so sweet to us, and what is bitter so bitter, that
we inevitably direct all our desires towards pleasures, and seek not
merely for a 'month or twain to feed on honeycomb,' but for all our years
to taste no other food, ignorant all the while that we may really be
starving the soul.

I remember talking once on this subject to one of the most beautiful
personalities I have ever known: a woman, whose sympathy and noble
kindness to me, both before and since the tragedy of my imprisonment,
have been beyond power and description; one who has really assisted me,
though she does not know it, to bear the burden of my troubles more than
any one else in the whole world has, and all through the mere fact of her
existence, through her being what she is--partly an ideal and partly an
influence: a suggestion of what one might become as well as a real help
towards becoming it; a soul that renders the common air sweet, and makes
what is spiritual seem as simple and natural as sunlight or the sea: one
for whom beauty and sorrow walk hand in hand, and have the same message.
On the occasion of which I am thinking I recall distinctly how I said to
her that there was enough suffering in one narrow London lane to show
that God did not love man, and that wherever there was any sorrow, though
but that of a child, in some little garden weeping over a fault that it
had or had not committed, the whole face of creation was completely
marred.  I was entirely wrong.  She told me so, but I could not believe
her.  I was not in the sphere in which such belief was to be attained to.
Now it seems to me that love of some kind is the only possible
explanation of the extraordinary amount of suffering that there is in the
world.  I cannot conceive of any other explanation.  I am convinced that
there is no other, and that if the world has indeed, as I have said, been
built of sorrow, it has been built by the hands of love, because in no
other way could the soul of man, for whom the world was made, reach the
full stature of its perfection.  Pleasure for the beautiful body, but
pain for the beautiful soul.

When I say that I am convinced of these things I speak with too much
pride.  Far off, like a perfect pearl, one can see the city of God.  It
is so wonderful that it seems as if a child could reach it in a summer's
day.  And so a child could.  But with me and such as me it is different.
One can realise a thing in a single moment, but one loses it in the long
hours that follow with leaden feet.  It is so difficult to keep 'heights
that the soul is competent to gain.'  We think in eternity, but we move
slowly through time; and how slowly time goes with us who lie in prison I
need not tell again, nor of the weariness and despair that creep back
into one's cell, and into the cell of one's heart, with such strange
insistence that one has, as it were, to garnish and sweep one's house for
their coming, as for an unwelcome guest, or a bitter master, or a slave
whose slave it is one's chance or choice to be.

And, though at present my friends may find it a hard thing to believe, it
is true none the less, that for them living in freedom and idleness and
comfort it is more easy to learn the lessons of humility than it is for
me, who begin the day by going down on my knees and washing the floor of
my cell.  For prison life with its endless privations and restrictions
makes one rebellious.  The most terrible thing about it is not that it
breaks one's heart--hearts are made to be broken--but that it turns one's
heart to stone.  One sometimes feels that it is only with a front of
brass and a lip of scorn that one can get through the day at all.  And he
who is in a state of rebellion cannot receive grace, to use the phrase of
which the Church is so fond--so rightly fond, I dare say--for in life as
in art the mood of rebellion closes up the channels of the soul, and
shuts out the airs of heaven.  Yet I must learn these lessons here, if I
am to learn them anywhere, and must be filled with joy if my feet are on
the right road and my face set towards 'the gate which is called
beautiful,' though I may fall many times in the mire and often in the
mist go astray.

This New Life, as through my love of Dante I like sometimes to call it,
is of course no new life at all, but simply the continuance, by means of
development, and evolution, of my former life.  I remember when I was at
Oxford saying to one of my friends as we were strolling round Magdalen's
narrow bird-haunted walks one morning in the year before I took my
degree, that I wanted to eat of the fruit of all the trees in the garden
of the world, and that I was going out into the world with that passion
in my soul.  And so, indeed, I went out, and so I lived.  My only mistake
was that I confined myself so exclusively to the trees of what seemed to
me the sun-lit side of the garden, and shunned the other side for its
shadow and its gloom.  Failure, disgrace, poverty, sorrow, despair,
suffering, tears even, the broken words that come from lips in pain,
remorse that makes one walk on thorns, conscience that condemns, self-
abasement that punishes, the misery that puts ashes on its head, the
anguish that chooses sack-cloth for its raiment and into its own drink
puts gall:--all these were things of which I was afraid.  And as I had
determined to know nothing of them, I was forced to taste each of them in
turn, to feed on them, to have for a season, indeed, no other food at
all.

I don't regret for a single moment having lived for pleasure.  I did it
to the full, as one should do everything that one does.  There was no
pleasure I did not experience.  I threw the pearl of my soul into a cup
of wine.  I went down the primrose path to the sound of flutes.  I lived
on honeycomb.  But to have continued the same life would have been wrong
because it would have been limiting.  I had to pass on.  The other half
of the garden had its secrets for me also.  Of course all this is
foreshadowed and prefigured in my books.  Some of it is in _The Happy
Prince_, some of it in _The Young King_, notably in the passage where the
bishop says to the kneeling boy, 'Is not He who made misery wiser than
thou art'? a phrase which when I wrote it seemed to me little more than a
phrase; a great deal of it is hidden away in the note of doom that like a
purple thread runs through the texture of _Dorian Gray_; in _The Critic
as Artist_ it is set forth in many colours; in _The Soul of Man_ it is
written down, and in letters too easy to read; it is one of the refrains
whose recurring _motifs_ make _Salome_ so like a piece of music and bind
it together as a ballad; in the prose poem of the man who from the bronze
of the image of the 'Pleasure that liveth for a moment' has to make the
image of the 'Sorrow that abideth for ever' it is incarnate.  It could
not have been otherwise.  At every single moment of one's life one is
what one is going to be no less than what one has been.  Art is a symbol,
because man is a symbol.

It is, if I can fully attain to it, the ultimate realisation of the
artistic life.  For the artistic life is simply self-development.
Humility in the artist is his frank acceptance of all experiences, just
as love in the artist is simply the sense of beauty that reveals to the
world its body and its soul.  In _Marius the Epicurean_ Pater seeks to
reconcile the artistic life with the life of religion, in the deep,
sweet, and austere sense of the word.  But Marius is little more than a
spectator: an ideal spectator indeed, and one to whom it is given 'to
contemplate the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions,' which
Wordsworth defines as the poet's true aim; yet a spectator merely, and
perhaps a little too much occupied with the comeliness of the benches of
the sanctuary to notice that it is the sanctuary of sorrow that he is
gazing at.

I see a far more intimate and immediate connection between the true life
of Christ and the true life of the artist; and I take a keen pleasure in
the reflection that long before sorrow had made my days her own and bound
me to her wheel I had written in _The Soul of Man_ that he who would lead
a Christ-like life must be entirely and absolutely himself, and had taken
as my types not merely the shepherd on the hillside and the prisoner in
his cell, but also the painter to whom the world is a pageant and the
poet for whom the world is a song.  I remember saying once to Andre Gide,
as we sat together in some Paris _cafe_, that while meta-physics had but
little real interest for me, and morality absolutely none, there was
nothing that either Plato or Christ had said that could not be
transferred immediately into the sphere of Art and there find its
complete fulfilment.

Nor is it merely that we can discern in Christ that close union of
personality with perfection which forms the real distinction between the
classical and romantic movement in life, but the very basis of his nature
was the same as that of the nature of the artist--an intense and
flamelike imagination.  He realised in the entire sphere of human
relations that imaginative sympathy which in the sphere of Art is the
sole secret of creation.  He understood the leprosy of the leper, the
darkness of the blind, the fierce misery of those who live for pleasure,
the strange poverty of the rich.  Some one wrote to me in trouble, 'When
you are not on your pedestal you are not interesting.'  How remote was
the writer from what Matthew Arnold calls 'the Secret of Jesus.'  Either
would have taught him that whatever happens to another happens to
oneself, and if you want an inscription to read at dawn and at
night-time, and for pleasure or for pain, write up on the walls of your
house in letters for the sun to gild and the moon to silver, 'Whatever
happens to oneself happens to another.'

Christ's place indeed is with the poets.  His whole conception of
Humanity sprang right out of the imagination and can only be realised by
it.  What God was to the pantheist, man was to Him.  He was the first to
conceive the divided races as a unity.  Before his time there had been
gods and men, and, feeling through the mysticism of sympathy that in
himself each had been made incarnate, he calls himself the Son of the one
or the Son of the other, according to his mood.  More than any one else
in history he wakes in us that temper of wonder to which romance always
appeals.  There is still something to me almost incredible in the idea of
a young Galilean peasant imagining that he could bear on his own
shoulders the burden of the entire world; all that had already been done
and suffered, and all that was yet to be done and suffered: the sins of
Nero, of Caesar Borgia, of Alexander VI., and of him who was Emperor of
Rome and Priest of the Sun: the sufferings of those whose names are
legion and whose dwelling is among the tombs: oppressed nationalities,
factory children, thieves, people in prison, outcasts, those who are dumb
under oppression and whose silence is heard only of God; and not merely
imagining this but actually achieving it, so that at the present moment
all who come in contact with his personality, even though they may
neither bow to his altar nor kneel before his priest, in some way find
that the ugliness of their sin is taken away and the beauty of their
sorrow revealed to them.

I had said of Christ that he ranks with the poets.  That is true.  Shelley
and Sophocles are of his company.  But his entire life also is the most
wonderful of poems.  For 'pity and terror' there is nothing in the entire
cycle of Greek tragedy to touch it.  The absolute purity of the
protagonist raises the entire scheme to a height of romantic art from
which the sufferings of Thebes and Pelops' line are by their very horror
excluded, and shows how wrong Aristotle was when he said in his treatise
on the drama that it would be impossible to bear the spectacle of one
blameless in pain.  Nor in AEschylus nor Dante, those stern masters of
tenderness, in Shakespeare, the most purely human of all the great
artists, in the whole of Celtic myth and legend, where the loveliness of
the world is shown through a mist of tears, and the life of a man is no
more than the life of a flower, is there anything that, for sheer
simplicity of pathos wedded and made one with sublimity of tragic effect,
can be said to equal or even approach the last act of Christ's passion.
The little supper with his companions, one of whom has already sold him
for a price; the anguish in the quiet moon-lit garden; the false friend
coming close to him so as to betray him with a kiss; the friend who still
believed in him, and on whom as on a rock he had hoped to build a house
of refuge for Man, denying him as the bird cried to the dawn; his own
utter loneliness, his submission, his acceptance of everything; and along
with it all such scenes as the high priest of orthodoxy rending his
raiment in wrath, and the magistrate of civil justice calling for water
in the vain hope of cleansing himself of that stain of innocent blood
that makes him the scarlet figure of history; the coronation ceremony of
sorrow, one of the most wonderful things in the whole of recorded time;
the crucifixion of the Innocent One before the eyes of his mother and of
the disciple whom he loved; the soldiers gambling and throwing dice for
his clothes; the terrible death by which he gave the world its most
eternal symbol; and his final burial in the tomb of the rich man, his
body swathed in Egyptian linen with costly spices and perfumes as though
he had been a king's son.  When one contemplates all this from the point
of view of art alone one cannot but be grateful that the supreme office
of the Church should be the playing of the tragedy without the shedding
of blood: the mystical presentation, by means of dialogue and costume and
gesture even, of the Passion of her Lord; and it is always a source of
pleasure and awe to me to remember that the ultimate survival of the
Greek chorus, lost elsewhere to art, is to be found in the servitor
answering the priest at Mass.

Yet the whole life of Christ--so entirely may sorrow and beauty be made
one in their meaning and manifestation--is really an idyll, though it
ends with the veil of the temple being rent, and the darkness coming over
the face of the earth, and the stone rolled to the door of the sepulchre.
One always thinks of him as a young bridegroom with his companions, as
indeed he somewhere describes himself; as a shepherd straying through a
valley with his sheep in search of green meadow or cool stream; as a
singer trying to build out of the music the walls of the City of God; or
as a lover for whose love the whole world was too small.  His miracles
seem to me to be as exquisite as the coming of spring, and quite as
natural.  I see no difficulty at all in believing that such was the charm
of his personality that his mere presence could bring peace to souls in
anguish, and that those who touched his garments or his hands forgot
their pain; or that as he passed by on the highway of life people who had
seen nothing of life's mystery, saw it clearly, and others who had been
deaf to every voice but that of pleasure heard for the first time the
voice of love and found it as 'musical as Apollo's lute'; or that evil
passions fled at his approach, and men whose dull unimaginative lives had
been but a mode of death rose as it were from the grave when he called
them; or that when he taught on the hillside the multitude forgot their
hunger and thirst and the cares of this world, and that to his friends
who listened to him as he sat at meat the coarse food seemed delicate,
and the water had the taste of good wine, and the whole house became full
of the odour and sweetness of nard.

Renan in his _Vie de Jesus_--that gracious fifth gospel, the gospel
according to St. Thomas, one might call it--says somewhere that Christ's
great achievement was that he made himself as much loved after his death
as he had been during his lifetime.  And certainly, if his place is among
the poets, he is the leader of all the lovers.  He saw that love was the
first secret of the world for which the wise men had been looking, and
that it was only through love that one could approach either the heart of
the leper or the feet of God.

And above all, Christ is the most supreme of individualists.  Humility,
like the artistic, acceptance of all experiences, is merely a mode of
manifestation.  It is man's soul that Christ is always looking for.  He
calls it 'God's Kingdom,' and finds it in every one.  He compares it to
little things, to a tiny seed, to a handful of leaven, to a pearl.  That
is because one realises one's soul only by getting rid of all alien
passions, all acquired culture, and all external possessions, be they
good or evil.

I bore up against everything with some stubbornness of will and much
rebellion of nature, till I had absolutely nothing left in the world but
one thing.  I had lost my name, my position, my happiness, my freedom, my
wealth.  I was a prisoner and a pauper.  But I still had my children
left.  Suddenly they were taken away from me by the law.  It was a blow
so appalling that I did not know what to do, so I flung myself on my
knees, and bowed my head, and wept, and said, 'The body of a child is as
the body of the Lord: I am not worthy of either.'  That moment seemed to
save me.  I saw then that the only thing for me was to accept everything.
Since then--curious as it will no doubt sound--I have been happier.  It
was of course my soul in its ultimate essence that I had reached.  In
many ways I had been its enemy, but I found it waiting for me as a
friend.  When one comes in contact with the soul it makes one simple as a
child, as Christ said one should be.

It is tragic how few people ever 'possess their souls' before they die.
'Nothing is more rare in any man,' says Emerson, 'than an act of his
own.'  It is quite true.  Most people are other people.  Their thoughts
are some one else's opinions, their lives a mimicry, their passions a
quotation.  Christ was not merely the supreme individualist, but he was
the first individualist in history.  People have tried to make him out an
ordinary philanthropist, or ranked him as an altruist with the scientific
and sentimental.  But he was really neither one nor the other.  Pity he
has, of course, for the poor, for those who are shut up in prisons, for
the lowly, for the wretched; but he has far more pity for the rich, for
the hard hedonists, for those who waste their freedom in becoming slaves
to things, for those who wear soft raiment and live in kings' houses.
Riches and pleasure seemed to him to be really greater tragedies than
poverty or sorrow.  And as for altruism, who knew better than he that it
is vocation not volition that determines us, and that one cannot gather
grapes of thorns or figs from thistles?

To live for others as a definite self-conscious aim was not his creed.  It
was not the basis of his creed.  When he says, 'Forgive your enemies,' it
is not for the sake of the enemy, but for one's own sake that he says so,
and because love is more beautiful than hate.  In his own entreaty to the
young man, 'Sell all that thou hast and give to the poor,' it is not of
the state of the poor that he is thinking but of the soul of the young
man, the soul that wealth was marring.  In his view of life he is one
with the artist who knows that by the inevitable law of self-perfection,
the poet must sing, and the sculptor think in bronze, and the painter
make the world a mirror for his moods, as surely and as certainly as the
hawthorn must blossom in spring, and the corn turn to gold at harvest-
time, and the moon in her ordered wanderings change from shield to
sickle, and from sickle to shield.

But while Christ did not say to men, 'Live for others,' he pointed out
that there was no difference at all between the lives of others and one's
own life.  By this means he gave to man an extended, a Titan personality.
Since his coming the history of each separate individual is, or can be
made, the history of the world.  Of course, culture has intensified the
personality of man.  Art has made us myriad-minded.  Those who have the
artistic temperament go into exile with Dante and learn how salt is the
bread of others, and how steep their stairs; they catch for a moment the
serenity and calm of Goethe, and yet know but too well that Baudelaire
cried to God--

Out of Shakespeare's sonnets they draw, to their own hurt it may be, the
secret of his love and make it their own; they look with new eyes on
modern life, because they have listened to one of Chopin's nocturnes, or
handled Greek things, or read the story of the passion of some dead man
for some dead woman whose hair was like threads of fine gold, and whose
mouth was as a pomegranate.  But the sympathy of the artistic temperament
is necessarily with what has found expression.  In words or in colours,
in music or in marble, behind the painted masks of an AEschylean play, or
through some Sicilian shepherds' pierced and jointed reeds, the man and
his message must have been revealed.

To the artist, expression is the only mode under which he can conceive
life at all.  To him what is dumb is dead.  But to Christ it was not so.
With a width and wonder of imagination that fills one almost with awe, he
took the entire world of the inarticulate, the voiceless world of pain,
as his kingdom, and made of himself its eternal mouthpiece.  Those of
whom I have spoken, who are dumb under oppression, and 'whose silence is
heard only of God,' he chose as his brothers.  He sought to become eyes
to the blind, ears to the deaf, and a cry in the lips of those whose
tongues had been tied.  His desire was to be to the myriads who had found
no utterance a very trumpet through which they might call to heaven.  And
feeling, with the artistic nature of one to whom suffering and sorrow
were modes through which he could realise his conception of the
beautiful, that an idea is of no value till it becomes incarnate and is
made an image, he made of himself the image of the Man of Sorrows, and as
such has fascinated and dominated art as no Greek god ever succeeded in
doing.

For the Greek gods, in spite of the white and red of their fair fleet
limbs, were not really what they appeared to be.  The curved brow of
Apollo was like the sun's disc crescent over a hill at dawn, and his feet
were as the wings of the morning, but he himself had been cruel to
Marsyas and had made Niobe childless.  In the steel shields of Athena's
eyes there had been no pity for Arachne; the pomp and peacocks of Hera
were all that was really noble about her; and the Father of the Gods
himself had been too fond of the daughters of men.  The two most deeply
suggestive figures of Greek Mythology were, for religion, Demeter, an
Earth Goddess, not one of the Olympians, and for art, Dionysus, the son
of a mortal woman to whom the moment of his birth had proved also the
moment of her death.

But Life itself from its lowliest and most humble sphere produced one far
more marvellous than the mother of Proserpina or the son of Semele.  Out
of the Carpenter's shop at Nazareth had come a personality infinitely
greater than any made by myth and legend, and one, strangely enough,
destined to reveal to the world the mystical meaning of wine and the real
beauties of the lilies of the field as none, either on Cithaeron or at
Enna, had ever done.

The song of Isaiah, 'He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him,' had
seemed to him to prefigure himself, and in him the prophecy was
fulfilled.  We must not be afraid of such a phrase.  Every single work of
art is the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every work of art is the
conversion of an idea into an image.  Every single human being should be
the fulfilment of a prophecy: for every human being should be the
realisation of some ideal, either in the mind of God or in the mind of
man.  Christ found the type and fixed it, and the dream of a Virgilian
poet, either at Jerusalem or at Babylon, became in the long progress of
the centuries incarnate in him for whom the world was waiting.

To me one of the things in history the most to be regretted is that the
Christ's own renaissance, which has produced the Cathedral at Chartres,
the Arthurian cycle of legends, the life of St. Francis of Assisi, the
art of Giotto, and Dante's _Divine Comedy_, was not allowed to develop on
its own lines, but was interrupted and spoiled by the dreary classical
Renaissance that gave us Petrarch, and Raphael's frescoes, and Palladian
architecture, and formal French tragedy, and St. Paul's Cathedral, and
Pope's poetry, and everything that is made from without and by dead
rules, and does not spring from within through some spirit informing it.
But wherever there is a romantic movement in art there somehow, and under
some form, is Christ, or the soul of Christ.  He is in _Romeo and
Juliet_, in the _Winter's Tale_, in Provencal poetry, in the _Ancient
Mariner_, in _La Belle Dame sans merci_, and in Chatterton's _Ballad of
Charity_.

We owe to him the most diverse things and people.  Hugo's _Les
Miserables_, Baudelaire's _Fleurs du Mal_, the note of pity in Russian
novels, Verlaine and Verlaine's poems, the stained glass and tapestries
and the quattro-cento work of Burne-Jones and Morris, belong to him no
less than the tower of Giotto, Lancelot and Guinevere, Tannhauser, the
troubled romantic marbles of Michael Angelo, pointed architecture, and
the love of children and flowers--for both of which, indeed, in classical
art there was but little place, hardly enough for them to grow or play
in, but which, from the twelfth century down to our own day, have been
continually making their appearances in art, under various modes and at
various times, coming fitfully and wilfully, as children, as flowers, are
apt to do: spring always seeming to one as if the flowers had been in
hiding, and only came out into the sun because they were afraid that
grown up people would grow tired of looking for them and give up the
search; and the life of a child being no more than an April day on which
there is both rain and sun for the narcissus.

It is the imaginative quality of Christ's own nature that makes him this
palpitating centre of romance.  The strange figures of poetic drama and
ballad are made by the imagination of others, but out of his own
imagination entirely did Jesus of Nazareth create himself.  The cry of
Isaiah had really no more to do with his coming than the song of the
nightingale has to do with the rising of the moon--no more, though
perhaps no less.  He was the denial as well as the affirmation of
prophecy.  For every expectation that he fulfilled there was another that
he destroyed.  'In all beauty,' says Bacon, 'there is some strangeness of
proportion,' and of those who are born of the spirit--of those, that is
to say, who like himself are dynamic forces--Christ says that they are
like the wind that 'bloweth where it listeth, and no man can tell whence
it cometh and whither it goeth.'  That is why he is so fascinating to
artists.  He has all the colour elements of life: mystery, strangeness,
pathos, suggestion, ecstasy, love.  He appeals to the temper of wonder,
and creates that mood in which alone he can be understood.

And to me it is a joy to remember that if he is 'of imagination all
compact,' the world itself is of the same substance.  I said in _Dorian
Gray_ that the great sins of the world take place in the brain: but it is
in the brain that everything takes place.  We know now that we do not see
with the eyes or hear with the ears.  They are really channels for the
transmission, adequate or inadequate, of sense impressions.  It is in the
brain that the poppy is red, that the apple is odorous, that the skylark
sings.

Of late I have been studying with diligence the four prose poems about
Christ.  At Christmas I managed to get hold of a Greek Testament, and
every morning, after I had cleaned my cell and polished my tins, I read a
little of the Gospels, a dozen verses taken by chance anywhere.  It is a
delightful way of opening the day.  Every one, even in a turbulent, ill-
disciplined life, should do the same.  Endless repetition, in and out of
season, has spoiled for us the freshness, the naivete, the simple
romantic charm of the Gospels.  We hear them read far too often and far
too badly, and all repetition is anti-spiritual.  When one returns to the
Greek; it is like going into a garden of lilies out of some, narrow and
dark house.

And to me, the pleasure is doubled by the reflection that it is extremely
probable that we have the actual terms, the _ipsissima verba_, used by
Christ.  It was always supposed that Christ talked in Aramaic.  Even
Renan thought so.  But now we know that the Galilean peasants, like the
Irish peasants of our own day, were bilingual, and that Greek was the
ordinary language of intercourse all over Palestine, as indeed all over
the Eastern world.  I never liked the idea that we knew of Christ's own
words only through a translation of a translation.  It is a delight to me
to think that as far as his conversation was concerned, Charmides might
have listened to him, and Socrates reasoned with him, and Plato
understood him: that he really said [Greek text], that when he thought of
the lilies of the field and how they neither toil nor spin, his absolute
expression was [Greek text], and that his last word when he cried out 'my
life has been completed, has reached its fulfilment, has been perfected,'
was exactly as St. John tells us it was: [Greek text]--no more.

While in reading the Gospels--particularly that of St. John himself, or
whatever early Gnostic took his name and mantle--I see the continual
assertion of the imagination as the basis of all spiritual and material
life, I see also that to Christ imagination was simply a form of love,
and that to him love was lord in the fullest meaning of the phrase.  Some
six weeks ago I was allowed by the doctor to have white bread to eat
instead of the coarse black or brown bread of ordinary prison fare.  It
is a great delicacy.  It will sound strange that dry bread could possibly
be a delicacy to any one.  To me it is so much so that at the close of
each meal I carefully eat whatever crumbs may be left on my tin plate, or
have fallen on the rough towel that one uses as a cloth so as not to soil
one's table; and I do so not from hunger--I get now quite sufficient
food--but simply in order that nothing should be wasted of what is given
to me.  So one should look on love.

Christ, like all fascinating personalities, had the power of not merely
saying beautiful things himself, but of making other people say beautiful
things to him; and I love the story St. Mark tells us about the Greek
woman, who, when as a trial of her faith he said to her that he could not
give her the bread of the children of Israel, answered him that the
little dogs--([Greek text], 'little dogs' it should be rendered)--who are
under the table eat of the crumbs that the children let fall.  Most
people live for love and admiration.  But it is by love and admiration
that we should live.  If any love is shown us we should recognise that we
are quite unworthy of it.  Nobody is worthy to be loved.  The fact that
God loves man shows us that in the divine order of ideal things it is
written that eternal love is to be given to what is eternally unworthy.
Or if that phrase seems to be a bitter one to bear, let us say that every
one is worthy of love, except him who thinks that he is.  Love is a
sacrament that should be taken kneeling, and _Domine, non sum dignus_
should be on the lips and in the hearts of those who receive it.

If ever I write again, in the sense of producing artistic work, there are
just two subjects on which and through which I desire to express myself:
one is 'Christ as the precursor of the romantic movement in life': the
other is 'The artistic life considered in its relation to conduct.'  The
first is, of course, intensely fascinating, for I see in Christ not
merely the essentials of the supreme romantic type, but all the
accidents, the wilfulnesses even, of the romantic temperament also.  He
was the first person who ever said to people that they should live
'flower-like lives.'  He fixed the phrase.  He took children as the type
of what people should try to become.  He held them up as examples to
their elders, which I myself have always thought the chief use of
children, if what is perfect should have a use.  Dante describes the soul
of a man as coming from the hand of God 'weeping and laughing like a
little child,' and Christ also saw that the soul of each one should be _a
guisa di fanciulla che piangendo e ridendo pargoleggia_.  He felt that
life was changeful, fluid, active, and that to allow it to be stereotyped
into any form was death.  He saw that people should not be too serious
over material, common interests: that to be unpractical was to be a great
thing: that one should not bother too much over affairs.  The birds
didn't, why should man?  He is charming when he says, 'Take no thought
for the morrow; is not the soul more than meat? is not the body more than
raiment?'  A Greek might have used the latter phrase.  It is full of
Greek feeling.  But only Christ could have said both, and so summed up
life perfectly for us.

His morality is all sympathy, just what morality should be.  If the only
thing that he ever said had been, 'Her sins are forgiven her because she
loved much,' it would have been worth while dying to have said it.  His
justice is all poetical justice, exactly what justice should be.  The
beggar goes to heaven because he has been unhappy.  I cannot conceive a
better reason for his being sent there.  The people who work for an hour
in the vineyard in the cool of the evening receive just as much reward as
those who have toiled there all day long in the hot sun.  Why shouldn't
they?  Probably no one deserved anything.  Or perhaps they were a
different kind of people.  Christ had no patience with the dull lifeless
mechanical systems that treat people as if they were things, and so treat
everybody alike: for him there were no laws: there were exceptions
merely, as if anybody, or anything, for that matter, was like aught else
in the world!

That which is the very keynote of romantic art was to him the proper
basis of natural life.  He saw no other basis.  And when they brought him
one, taken in the very act of sin and showed him her sentence written in
the law, and asked him what was to be done, he wrote with his finger on
the ground as though he did not hear them, and finally, when they pressed
him again, looked up and said, 'Let him of you who has never sinned be
the first to throw the stone at her.'  It was worth while living to have
said that.

Like all poetical natures he loved ignorant people.  He knew that in the
soul of one who is ignorant there is always room for a great idea.  But
he could not stand stupid people, especially those who are made stupid by
education: people who are full of opinions not one of which they even
understand, a peculiarly modern type, summed up by Christ when he
describes it as the type of one who has the key of knowledge, cannot use
it himself, and does not allow other people to use it, though it may be
made to open the gate of God's Kingdom.  His chief war was against the
Philistines.  That is the war every child of light has to wage.
Philistinism was the note of the age and community in which he lived.  In
their heavy inaccessibility to ideas, their dull respectability, their
tedious orthodoxy, their worship of vulgar success, their entire
preoccupation with the gross materialistic side of life, and their
ridiculous estimate of themselves and their importance, the Jews of
Jerusalem in Christ's day were the exact counterpart of the British
Philistine of our own.  Christ mocked at the 'whited sepulchre' of
respectability, and fixed that phrase for ever.  He treated worldly
success as a thing absolutely to be despised.  He saw nothing in it at
all.  He looked on wealth as an encumbrance to a man.  He would not hear
of life being sacrificed to any system of thought or morals.  He pointed
out that forms and ceremonies were made for man, not man for forms and
ceremonies.  He took sabbatarianism as a type of the things that should
be set at nought.  The cold philanthropies, the ostentatious public
charities, the tedious formalisms so dear to the middle-class mind, he
exposed with utter and relentless scorn.  To us, what is termed orthodoxy
is merely a facile unintelligent acquiescence; but to them, and in their
hands, it was a terrible and paralysing tyranny.  Christ swept it aside.
He showed that the spirit alone was of value.  He took a keen pleasure in
pointing out to them that though they were always reading the law and the
prophets, they had not really the smallest idea of what either of them
meant.  In opposition to their tithing of each separate day into the
fixed routine of prescribed duties, as they tithe mint and rue, he
preached the enormous importance of living completely for the moment.

Those whom he saved from their sins are saved simply for beautiful
moments in their lives.  Mary Magdalen, when she sees Christ, breaks the
rich vase of alabaster that one of her seven lovers had given her, and
spills the odorous spices over his tired dusty feet, and for that one
moment's sake sits for ever with Ruth and Beatrice in the tresses of the
snow-white rose of Paradise.  All that Christ says to us by the way of a
little warning is that every moment should be beautiful, that the soul
should always be ready for the coming of the bridegroom, always waiting
for the voice of the lover, Philistinism being simply that side of man's
nature that is not illumined by the imagination.  He sees all the lovely
influences of life as modes of light: the imagination itself is the world
of light.  The world is made by it, and yet the world cannot understand
it: that is because the imagination is simply a manifestation of love,
and it is love and the capacity for it that distinguishes one human being
from another.

But it is when he deals with a sinner that Christ is most romantic, in
the sense of most real.  The world had always loved the saint as being
the nearest possible approach to the perfection of God.  Christ, through
some divine instinct in him, seems to have always loved the sinner as
being the nearest possible approach to the perfection of man.  His
primary desire was not to reform people, any more than his primary desire
was to a relieve suffering.  To turn an interesting thief into a tedious
honest man was not his aim.  He would have thought little of the
Prisoners' Aid Society and other modern movements of the kind.  The
conversion of a publican into a Pharisee would not have seemed to him a
great achievement.  But in a manner not yet understood of the world he
regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy things
and modes of perfection.

It seems a very dangerous idea.  It is--all great ideas are dangerous.
That it was Christ's creed admits of no doubt.  That it is the true creed
I don't doubt myself.

Of course the sinner must repent.  But why?  Simply because otherwise he
would be unable to realise what he had done.  The moment of repentance is
the moment of initiation.  More than that: it is the means by which one
alters one's past.  The Greeks thought that impossible.  They often say
in their Gnomic aphorisms, 'Even the Gods cannot alter the past.'  Christ
showed that the commonest sinner could do it, that it was the one thing
he could do.  Christ, had he been asked, would have said--I feel quite
certain about it--that the moment the prodigal son fell on his knees and
wept, he made his having wasted his substance with harlots, his swine-
herding and hungering for the husks they ate, beautiful and holy moments
in his life.  It is difficult for most people to grasp the idea.  I dare
say one has to go to prison to understand it.  If so, it may be worth
while going to prison.

There is something so unique about Christ.  Of course just as there are
false dawns before the dawn itself, and winter days so full of sudden
sunlight that they will cheat the wise crocus into squandering its gold
before its time, and make some foolish bird call to its mate to build on
barren boughs, so there were Christians before Christ.  For that we
should be grateful.  The unfortunate thing is that there have been none
since.  I make one exception, St. Francis of Assisi.  But then God had
given him at his birth the soul of a poet, as he himself when quite young
had in mystical marriage taken poverty as his bride: and with the soul of
a poet and the body of a beggar he found the way to perfection not
difficult.  He understood Christ, and so he became like him.  We do not
require the Liber Conformitatum to teach us that the life of St. Francis
was the true _Imitatio Christi_, a poem compared to which the book of
that name is merely prose.

Indeed, that is the charm about Christ, when all is said: he is just like
a work of art.  He does not really teach one anything, but by being
brought into his presence one becomes something.  And everybody is
predestined to his presence.  Once at least in his life each man walks
with Christ to Emmaus.

As regards the other subject, the Relation of the Artistic Life to
Conduct, it will no doubt seem strange to you that I should select it.
People point to Reading Gaol and say, 'That is where the artistic life
leads a man.'  Well, it might lead to worse places.  The more mechanical
people to whom life is a shrewd speculation depending on a careful
calculation of ways and means, always know where they are going, and go
there.  They start with the ideal desire of being the parish beadle, and
in whatever sphere they are placed they succeed in being the parish
beadle and no more.  A man whose desire is to be something separate from
himself, to be a member of Parliament, or a successful grocer, or a
prominent solicitor, or a judge, or something equally tedious, invariably
succeeds in being what he wants to be.  That is his punishment.  Those
who want a mask have to wear it.

But with the dynamic forces of life, and those in whom those dynamic
forces become incarnate, it is different.  People whose desire is solely
for self-realisation never know where they are going.  They can't know.
In one sense of the word it is of course necessary, as the Greek oracle
said, to know oneself: that is the first achievement of knowledge.  But
to recognise that the soul of a man is unknowable, is the ultimate
achievement of wisdom.  The final mystery is oneself.  When one has
weighed the sun in the balance, and measured the steps of the moon, and
mapped out the seven heavens star by star, there still remains oneself.
Who can calculate the orbit of his own soul?  When the son went out to
look for his father's asses, he did not know that a man of God was
waiting for him with the very chrism of coronation, and that his own soul
was already the soul of a king.

I hope to live long enough and to produce work of such a character that I
shall be able at the end of my days to say, 'Yes! this is just where the
artistic life leads a man!'  Two of the most perfect lives I have come
across in my own experience are the lives of Verlaine and of Prince
Kropotkin: both of them men who have passed years in prison: the first,
the one Christian poet since Dante; the other, a man with a soul of that
beautiful white Christ which seems coming out of Russia.  And for the
last seven or eight months, in spite of a succession of great troubles
reaching me from the outside world almost without intermission, I have
been placed in direct contact with a new spirit working in this prison
through man and things, that has helped me beyond any possibility of
expression in words: so that while for the first year of my imprisonment
I did nothing else, and can remember doing nothing else, but wring my
hands in impotent despair, and say, 'What an ending, what an appalling
ending!' now I try to say to myself, and sometimes when I am not
torturing myself do really and sincerely say, 'What a beginning, what a
wonderful beginning!'  It may really be so.  It may become so.  If it
does I shall owe much to this new personality that has altered every
man's life in this place.

You may realise it when I say that had I been released last May, as I
tried to be, I would have left this place loathing it and every official
in it with a bitterness of hatred that would have poisoned my life.  I
have had a year longer of imprisonment, but humanity has been in the
prison along with us all, and now when I go out I shall always remember
great kindnesses that I have received here from almost everybody, and on
the day of my release I shall give many thanks to many people, and ask to
be remembered by them in turn.

The prison style is absolutely and entirely wrong.  I would give anything
to be able to alter it when I go out.  I intend to try.  But there is
nothing in the world so wrong but that the spirit of humanity, which is
the spirit of love, the spirit of the Christ who is not in churches, may
make it, if not right, at least possible to be borne without too much
bitterness of heart.

I know also that much is waiting for me outside that is very delightful,
from what St. Francis of Assisi calls 'my brother the wind, and my sister
the rain,' lovely things both of them, down to the shop-windows and
sunsets of great cities.  If I made a list of all that still remains to
me, I don't know where I should stop: for, indeed, God made the world
just as much for me as for any one else.  Perhaps I may go out with
something that I had not got before.  I need not tell you that to me
reformations in morals are as meaningless and vulgar as Reformations in
theology.  But while to propose to be a better man is a piece of
unscientific cant, to have become a deeper man is the privilege of those
who have suffered.  And such I think I have become.

If after I am free a friend of mine gave a feast, and did not invite me
to it, I should not mind a bit.  I can be perfectly happy by myself.  With
freedom, flowers, books, and the moon, who could not be perfectly happy?
Besides, feasts are not for me any more.  I have given too many to care
about them.  That side of life is over for me, very fortunately, I dare
say.  But if after I am free a friend of mine had a sorrow and refused to
allow me to share it, I should feel it most bitterly.  If he shut the
doors of the house of mourning against me, I would come back again and
again and beg to be admitted, so that I might share in what I was
entitled to share in.  If he thought me unworthy, unfit to weep with him,
I should feel it as the most poignant humiliation, as the most terrible
mode in which disgrace could be inflicted on me.  But that could not be.
I have a right to share in sorrow, and he who can look at the loveliness
of the world and share its sorrow, and realise something of the wonder of
both, is in immediate contact with divine things, and has got as near to
God's secret as any one can get.

Perhaps there may come into my art also, no less than into my life, a
still deeper note, one of greater unity of passion, and directness of
impulse.  Not width but intensity is the true aim of modern art.  We are
no longer in art concerned with the type.  It is with the exception that
we have to do.  I cannot put my sufferings into any form they took, I
need hardly say.  Art only begins where Imitation ends, but something
must come into my work, of fuller memory of words perhaps, of richer
cadences, of more curious effects, of simpler architectural order, of
some aesthetic quality at any rate.

When Marsyas was 'torn from the scabbard of his limbs'--_della vagina
della membre sue_, to use one of Dante's most terrible Tacitean
phrases--he had no more song, the Greek said.  Apollo had been victor.
The lyre had vanquished the reed.  But perhaps the Greeks were mistaken.
I hear in much modern Art the cry of Marsyas.  It is bitter in
Baudelaire, sweet and plaintive in Lamartine, mystic in Verlaine.  It is
in the deferred resolutions of Chopin's music.  It is in the discontent
that haunts Burne-Jones's women.  Even Matthew Arnold, whose song of
Callicles tells of 'the triumph of the sweet persuasive lyre,' and the
'famous final victory,' in such a clear note of lyrical beauty, has not a
little of it; in the troubled undertone of doubt and distress that haunts
his verses, neither Goethe nor Wordsworth could help him, though he
followed each in turn, and when he seeks to mourn for _Thyrsis_ or to
sing of the _Scholar Gipsy_, it is the reed that he has to take for the
rendering of his strain.  But whether or not the Phrygian Faun was
silent, I cannot be.  Expression is as necessary to me as leaf and
blossoms are to the black branches of the trees that show themselves
above the prison walls and are so restless in the wind.  Between my art
and the world there is now a wide gulf, but between art and myself there
is none.  I hope at least that there is none.

To each of us different fates are meted out.  My lot has been one of
public infamy, of long imprisonment, of misery, of ruin, of disgrace, but
I am not worthy of it--not yet, at any rate.  I remember that I used to
say that I thought I could bear a real tragedy if it came to me with
purple pall and a mask of noble sorrow, but that the dreadful thing about
modernity was that it put tragedy into the raiment of comedy, so that the
great realities seemed commonplace or grotesque or lacking in style.  It
is quite true about modernity.  It has probably always been true about
actual life.  It is said that all martyrdoms seemed mean to the looker
on.  The nineteenth century is no exception to the rule.

Everything about my tragedy has been hideous, mean, repellent, lacking in
style; our very dress makes us grotesque.  We are the zanies of sorrow.
We are clowns whose hearts are broken.  We are specially designed to
appeal to the sense of humour.  On November 13th, 1895, I was brought
down here from London.  From two o'clock till half-past two on that day I
had to stand on the centre platform of Clapham Junction in convict dress,
and handcuffed, for the world to look at.  I had been taken out of the
hospital ward without a moment's notice being given to me.  Of all
possible objects I was the most grotesque.  When people saw me they
laughed.  Each train as it came up swelled the audience.  Nothing could
exceed their amusement.  That was, of course, before they knew who I was.
As soon as they had been informed they laughed still more.  For half an
hour I stood there in the grey November rain surrounded by a jeering mob.

For a year after that was done to me I wept every day at the same hour
and for the same space of time.  That is not such a tragic thing as
possibly it sounds to you.  To those who are in prison tears are a part
of every day's experience.  A day in prison on which one does not weep is
a day on which one's heart is hard, not a day on which one's heart is
happy.

Well, now I am really beginning to feel more regret for the people who
laughed than for myself.  Of course when they saw me I was not on my
pedestal, I was in the pillory.  But it is a very unimaginative nature
that only cares for people on their pedestals.  A pedestal may be a very
unreal thing.  A pillory is a terrific reality.  They should have known
also how to interpret sorrow better.  I have said that behind sorrow
there is always sorrow.  It were wiser still to say that behind sorrow
there is always a soul.  And to mock at a soul in pain is a dreadful
thing.  In the strangely simple economy of the world people only get what
they give, and to those who have not enough imagination to penetrate the
mere outward of things, and feel pity, what pity can be given save that
of scorn?

I write this account of the mode of my being transferred here simply that
it should be realised how hard it has been for me to get anything out of
my punishment but bitterness and despair.  I have, however, to do it, and
now and then I have moments of submission and acceptance.  All the spring
may be hidden in the single bud, and the low ground nest of the lark may
hold the joy that is to herald the feet of many rose-red dawns.  So
perhaps whatever beauty of life still remains to me is contained in some
moment of surrender, abasement, and humiliation.  I can, at any rate,
merely proceed on the lines of my own development, and, accepting all
that has happened to me, make myself worthy of it.

People used to say of me that I was too individualistic.  I must be far
more of an individualist than ever I was.  I must get far more out of
myself than ever I got, and ask far less of the world than ever I asked.
Indeed, my ruin came not from too great individualism of life, but from
too little.  The one disgraceful, unpardonable, and to all time
contemptible action of my life was to allow myself to appeal to society
for help and protection.  To have made such an appeal would have been
from the individualist point of view bad enough, but what excuse can
there ever be put forward for having made it?  Of course once I had put
into motion the forces of society, society turned on me and said, 'Have
you been living all this time in defiance of my laws, and do you now
appeal to those laws for protection?  You shall have those laws exercised
to the full.  You shall abide by what you have appealed to.'  The result
is I am in gaol.  Certainly no man ever fell so ignobly, and by such
ignoble instruments, as I did.

The Philistine element in life is not the failure to understand art.
Charming people, such as fishermen, shepherds, ploughboys, peasants and
the like, know nothing about art, and are the very salt of the earth.  He
is the Philistine who upholds and aids the heavy, cumbrous, blind,
mechanical forces of society, and who does not recognise dynamic force
when he meets it either in a man or a movement.

People thought it dreadful of me to have entertained at dinner the evil
things of life, and to have found pleasure in their company.  But then,
from the point of view through which I, as an artist in life, approach
them they were delightfully suggestive and stimulating.  The danger was
half the excitement. . . . My business as an artist was with Ariel.  I
set myself to wrestle with Caliban. . . .

A great friend of mine--a friend of ten years' standing--came to see me
some time ago, and told me that he did not believe a single word of what
was said against me, and wished me to know that he considered me quite
innocent, and the victim of a hideous plot.  I burst into tears at what
he said, and told him that while there was much amongst the definite
charges that was quite untrue and transferred to me by revolting malice,
still that my life had been full of perverse pleasures, and that unless
he accepted that as a fact about me and realised it to the full I could
not possibly be friends with him any more, or ever be in his company.  It
was a terrible shock to him, but we are friends, and I have not got his
friendship on false pretences.

Emotional forces, as I say somewhere in _Intentions_, are as limited in
extent and duration as the forces of physical energy.  The little cup
that is made to hold so much can hold so much and no more, though all the
purple vats of Burgundy be filled with wine to the brim, and the treaders
stand knee-deep in the gathered grapes of the stony vineyards of Spain.
There is no error more common than that of thinking that those who are
the causes or occasions of great tragedies share in the feelings suitable
to the tragic mood: no error more fatal than expecting it of them.  The
martyr in his 'shirt of flame' may be looking on the face of God, but to
him who is piling the faggots or loosening the logs for the blast the
whole scene is no more than the slaying of an ox is to the butcher, or
the felling of a tree to the charcoal burner in the forest, or the fall
of a flower to one who is mowing down the grass with a scythe.  Great
passions are for the great of soul, and great events can be seen only by
those who are on a level with them.

* * * * *

I know of nothing in all drama more incomparable from the point of view
of art, nothing more suggestive in its subtlety of observation, than
Shakespeare's drawing of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  They are Hamlet's
college friends.  They have been his companions.  They bring with them
memories of pleasant days together.  At the moment when they come across
him in the play he is staggering under the weight of a burden intolerable
to one of his temperament.  The dead have come armed out of the grave to
impose on him a mission at once too great and too mean for him.  He is a
dreamer, and he is called upon to act.  He has the nature of the poet,
and he is asked to grapple with the common complexity of cause and
effect, with life in its practical realisation, of which he knows
nothing, not with life in its ideal essence, of which he knows so much.
He has no conception of what to do, and his folly is to feign folly.
Brutus used madness as a cloak to conceal the sword of his purpose, the
dagger of his will, but the Hamlet madness is a mere mask for the hiding
of weakness.  In the making of fancies and jests he sees a chance of
delay.  He keeps playing with action as an artist plays with a theory.  He
makes himself the spy of his proper actions, and listening to his own
words knows them to be but 'words, words, words.'  Instead of trying to
be the hero of his own history, he seeks to be the spectator of his own
tragedy.  He disbelieves in everything, including himself, and yet his
doubt helps him not, as it comes not from scepticism but from a divided
will.

Of all this Guildenstern and Rosencrantz realise nothing.  They bow and
smirk and smile, and what the one says the other echoes with sickliest
intonation.  When, at last, by means of the play within the play, and the
puppets in their dalliance, Hamlet 'catches the conscience' of the King,
and drives the wretched man in terror from his throne, Guildenstern and
Rosencrantz see no more in his conduct than a rather painful breach of
Court etiquette.  That is as far as they can attain to in 'the
contemplation of the spectacle of life with appropriate emotions.'  They
are close to his very secret and know nothing of it.  Nor would there be
any use in telling them.  They are the little cups that can hold so much
and no more.  Towards the close it is suggested that, caught in a cunning
spring set for another, they have met, or may meet, with a violent and
sudden death.  But a tragic ending of this kind, though touched by
Hamlet's humour with something of the surprise and justice of comedy, is
really not for such as they.  They never die.  Horatio, who in order to
'report Hamlet and his cause aright to the unsatisfied,'

   'Absents him from felicity a while,
   And in this harsh world draws his breath in pain,'

dies, but Guildenstern and Rosencrantz are as immortal as Angelo and
Tartuffe, and should rank with them.  They are what modern life has
contributed to the antique ideal of friendship.  He who writes a new _De
Amicitia_ must find a niche for them, and praise them in Tusculan prose.
They are types fixed for all time.  To censure them would show 'a lack of
appreciation.'  They are merely out of their sphere: that is all.  In
sublimity of soul there is no contagion.  High thoughts and high emotions
are by their very existence isolated.

* * * * *

I am to be released, if all goes well with me, towards the end of May,
and hope to go at once to some little sea-side village abroad with R---
and M---.

The sea, as Euripides says in one of his plays about Iphigeneia, washes
away the stains and wounds of the world.

I hope to be at least a month with my friends, and to gain peace and
balance, and a less troubled heart, and a sweeter mood.  I have a strange
longing for the great simple primeval things, such as the sea, to me no
less of a mother than the Earth.  It seems to me that we all look at
Nature too much, and live with her too little.  I discern great sanity in
the Greek attitude.  They never chattered about sunsets, or discussed
whether the shadows on the grass were really mauve or not.  But they saw
that the sea was for the swimmer, and the sand for the feet of the
runner.  They loved the trees for the shadow that they cast, and the
forest for its silence at noon.  The vineyard-dresser wreathed his hair
with ivy that he might keep off the rays of the sun as he stooped over
the young shoots, and for the artist and the athlete, the two types that
Greece gave us, they plaited with garlands the leaves of the bitter
laurel and of the wild parsley, which else had been of no service to men.

We call ours a utilitarian age, and we do not know the uses of any single
thing.  We have forgotten that water can cleanse, and fire purify, and
that the Earth is mother to us all.  As a consequence our art is of the
moon and plays with shadows, while Greek art is of the sun and deals
directly with things.  I feel sure that in elemental forces there is
purification, and I want to go back to them and live in their presence.

Of course to one so modern as I am, 'Enfant de mon siecle,' merely to
look at the world will be always lovely.  I tremble with pleasure when I
think that on the very day of my leaving prison both the laburnum and the
lilac will be blooming in the gardens, and that I shall see the wind stir
into restless beauty the swaying gold of the one, and make the other toss
the pale purple of its plumes, so that all the air shall be Arabia for
me.  Linnaeus fell on his knees and wept for joy when he saw for the
first time the long heath of some English upland made yellow with the
tawny aromatic brooms of the common furze; and I know that for me, to
whom flowers are part of desire, there are tears waiting in the petals of
some rose.  It has always been so with me from my boyhood.  There is not
a single colour hidden away in the chalice of a flower, or the curve of a
shell, to which, by some subtle sympathy with the very soul of things, my
nature does not answer.  Like Gautier, I have always been one of those
'pour qui le monde visible existe.'

Still, I am conscious now that behind all this beauty, satisfying though
it may be, there is some spirit hidden of which the painted forms and
shapes are but modes of manifestation, and it is with this spirit that I
desire to become in harmony.  I have grown tired of the articulate
utterances of men and things.  The Mystical in Art, the Mystical in Life,
the Mystical in Nature this is what I am looking for.  It is absolutely
necessary for me to find it somewhere.

All trials are trials for one's life, just as all sentences are sentences
of death; and three times have I been tried.  The first time I left the
box to be arrested, the second time to be led back to the house of
detention, the third time to pass into a prison for two years.  Society,
as we have constituted it, will have no place for me, has none to offer;
but Nature, whose sweet rains fall on unjust and just alike, will have
clefts in the rocks where I may hide, and secret valleys in whose silence
I may weep undisturbed.  She will hang the night with stars so that I may
walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send the wind over my
footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will cleanse me in
great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole.


               I.

               He did not wear his scarlet coat,
                 For blood and wine are red,
               And blood and wine were on his hands
                 When they found him with the dead,
               The poor dead woman whom he loved,
                 And murdered in her bed.

               He walked amongst the Trial Men
                 In a suit of shabby grey;
               A cricket cap was on his head,
                 And his step seemed light and gay;
               But I never saw a man who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw a man who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 Which prisoners call the sky,
               And at every drifting cloud that went
                 With sails of silver by.

               I walked, with other souls in pain,
                 Within another ring,
               And was wondering if the man had done
                 A great or little thing,
               When a voice behind me whispered low,
                 "That fellow's got to swing."

               Dear Christ! the very prison walls
                 Suddenly seemed to reel,
               And the sky above my head became
                 Like a casque of scorching steel;
               And, though I was a soul in pain,
                 My pain I could not feel.

               I only knew what hunted thought
                 Quickened his step, and why
               He looked upon the garish day
                 With such a wistful eye;
               The man had killed the thing he loved
                 And so he had to die.

               Yet each man kills the thing he loves
                 By each let this be heard,
               Some do it with a bitter look,
                 Some with a flattering word,
               The coward does it with a kiss,
                 The brave man with a sword!

               Some kill their love when they are young,
                 And some when they are old;
               Some strangle with the hands of Lust,
                 Some with the hands of Gold:
               The kindest use a knife, because
                 The dead so soon grow cold.

               Some love too little, some too long,
                 Some sell, and others buy;
               Some do the deed with many tears,
                 And some without a sigh:
               For each man kills the thing he loves,
                 Yet each man does not die.

               He does not die a death of shame
                 On a day of dark disgrace,
               Nor have a noose about his neck,
                 Nor a cloth upon his face,
               Nor drop feet foremost through the floor
                 Into an empty place

               He does not sit with silent men
                 Who watch him night and day;
               Who watch him when he tries to weep,
                 And when he tries to pray;
               Who watch him lest himself should rob
                 The prison of its prey.

               He does not wake at dawn to see
                 Dread figures throng his room,
               The shivering Chaplain robed in white,
                 The Sheriff stern with gloom,
               And the Governor all in shiny black,
                 With the yellow face of Doom.

               He does not rise in piteous haste
                 To put on convict-clothes,
               While some coarse-mouthed Doctor gloats, and notes
                 Each new and nerve-twitched pose,
               Fingering a watch whose little ticks
                 Are like horrible hammer-blows.

               He does not know that sickening thirst
                 That sands one's throat, before
               The hangman with his gardener's gloves
                 Slips through the padded door,
               And binds one with three leathern thongs,
                 That the throat may thirst no more.

               He does not bend his head to hear
                 The Burial Office read,
               Nor, while the terror of his soul
                 Tells him he is not dead,
               Cross his own coffin, as he moves
                 Into the hideous shed.

               He does not stare upon the air
                 Through a little roof of glass;
               He does not pray with lips of clay
                 For his agony to pass;
               Nor feel upon his shuddering cheek
                 The kiss of Caiaphas.



               II.

               Six weeks our guardsman walked the yard,
                 In a suit of shabby grey:
               His cricket cap was on his head,
                 And his step seemed light and gay,
               But I never saw a man who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw a man who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 Which prisoners call the sky,
               And at every wandering cloud that trailed
                 Its raveled fleeces by.

               He did not wring his hands, as do
                 Those witless men who dare
               To try to rear the changeling Hope
                 In the cave of black Despair:
               He only looked upon the sun,
                 And drank the morning air.

               He did not wring his hands nor weep,
                 Nor did he peek or pine,
               But he drank the air as though it held
                 Some healthful anodyne;
               With open mouth he drank the sun
                 As though it had been wine!

               And I and all the souls in pain,
                 Who tramped the other ring,
               Forgot if we ourselves had done
                 A great or little thing,
               And watched with gaze of dull amaze
                 The man who had to swing.

               And strange it was to see him pass
                 With a step so light and gay,
               And strange it was to see him look
                 So wistfully at the day,
               And strange it was to think that he
                 Had such a debt to pay.

               For oak and elm have pleasant leaves
                 That in the spring-time shoot:
               But grim to see is the gallows-tree,
                 With its adder-bitten root,
               And, green or dry, a man must die
                 Before it bears its fruit!

               The loftiest place is that seat of grace
                 For which all worldlings try:
               But who would stand in hempen band
                 Upon a scaffold high,
               And through a murderer's collar take
                 His last look at the sky?

               It is sweet to dance to violins
                 When Love and Life are fair:
               To dance to flutes, to dance to lutes
                 Is delicate and rare:
               But it is not sweet with nimble feet
                 To dance upon the air!

               So with curious eyes and sick surmise
                 We watched him day by day,
               And wondered if each one of us
                 Would end the self-same way,
               For none can tell to what red Hell
                 His sightless soul may stray.

               At last the dead man walked no more
                 Amongst the Trial Men,
               And I knew that he was standing up
                 In the black dock's dreadful pen,
               And that never would I see his face
                 In God's sweet world again.

               Like two doomed ships that pass in storm
                 We had crossed each other's way:
               But we made no sign, we said no word,
                 We had no word to say;
               For we did not meet in the holy night,
                 But in the shameful day.

               A prison wall was round us both,
                 Two outcast men were we:
               The world had thrust us from its heart,
                 And God from out His care:
               And the iron gin that waits for Sin
                 Had caught us in its snare.

               In Debtors' Yard the stones are hard,
                 And the dripping wall is high,
               So it was there he took the air
                 Beneath the leaden sky,
               And by each side a Warder walked,
                 For fear the man might die.

               Or else he sat with those who watched
                 His anguish night and day;
               Who watched him when he rose to weep,
                 And when he crouched to pray;
               Who watched him lest himself should rob
                 Their scaffold of its prey.

               The Governor was strong upon
                 The Regulations Act:
               The Doctor said that Death was but
                 A scientific fact:
               And twice a day the Chaplain called
                 And left a little tract.

               And twice a day he smoked his pipe,
                 And drank his quart of beer:
               His soul was resolute, and held
                 No hiding-place for fear;
               He often said that he was glad
                 The hangman's hands were near.

               But why he said so strange a thing
                 No Warder dared to ask:
               For he to whom a watcher's doom
                 Is given as his task,
               Must set a lock upon his lips,
                 And make his face a mask.

               Or else he might be moved, and try
                 To comfort or console:
               And what should Human Pity do
                 Pent up in Murderers' Hole?
               What word of grace in such a place
                 Could help a brother's soul?

               With slouch and swing around the ring
                 We trod the Fool's Parade!
               We did not care: we knew we were
                 The Devil's Own Brigade:
               And shaven head and feet of lead
                 Make a merry masquerade.

               We tore the tarry rope to shreds
                 With blunt and bleeding nails;
               We rubbed the doors, and scrubbed the floors,
                 And cleaned the shining rails:
               And, rank by rank, we soaped the plank,
                 And clattered with the pails.

               We sewed the sacks, we broke the stones,
                 We turned the dusty drill:
               We banged the tins, and bawled the hymns,
                 And sweated on the mill:
               But in the heart of every man
                 Terror was lying still.

               So still it lay that every day
                 Crawled like a weed-clogged wave:
               And we forgot the bitter lot
                 That waits for fool and knave,
               Till once, as we tramped in from work,
                 We passed an open grave.

               With yawning mouth the yellow hole
                 Gaped for a living thing;
               The very mud cried out for blood
                 To the thirsty asphalte ring:
               And we knew that ere one dawn grew fair
                 Some prisoner had to swing.

               Right in we went, with soul intent
                 On Death and Dread and Doom:
               The hangman, with his little bag,
                 Went shuffling through the gloom
               And each man trembled as he crept
                 Into his numbered tomb.

               That night the empty corridors
                 Were full of forms of Fear,
               And up and down the iron town
                 Stole feet we could not hear,
               And through the bars that hide the stars
                 White faces seemed to peer.

               He lay as one who lies and dreams
                 In a pleasant meadow-land,
               The watcher watched him as he slept,
                 And could not understand
               How one could sleep so sweet a sleep
                 With a hangman close at hand?

               But there is no sleep when men must weep
                 Who never yet have wept:
               So we--the fool, the fraud, the knave--
                 That endless vigil kept,
               And through each brain on hands of pain
                 Another's terror crept.

               Alas! it is a fearful thing
                 To feel another's guilt!
               For, right within, the sword of Sin
                 Pierced to its poisoned hilt,
               And as molten lead were the tears we shed
                 For the blood we had not spilt.

               The Warders with their shoes of felt
                 Crept by each padlocked door,
               And peeped and saw, with eyes of awe,
                 Grey figures on the floor,
               And wondered why men knelt to pray
                 Who never prayed before.

               All through the night we knelt and prayed,
                 Mad mourners of a corpse!
               The troubled plumes of midnight were
                 The plumes upon a hearse:
               And bitter wine upon a sponge
                 Was the savior of Remorse.

               The cock crew, the red cock crew,
                 But never came the day:
               And crooked shape of Terror crouched,
                 In the corners where we lay:
               And each evil sprite that walks by night
                 Before us seemed to play.

               They glided past, they glided fast,
                 Like travelers through a mist:
               They mocked the moon in a rigadoon
                 Of delicate turn and twist,
               And with formal pace and loathsome grace
                 The phantoms kept their tryst.

               With mop and mow, we saw them go,
                 Slim shadows hand in hand:
               About, about, in ghostly rout
                 They trod a saraband:
               And the damned grotesques made arabesques,
                 Like the wind upon the sand!

               With the pirouettes of marionettes,
                 They tripped on pointed tread:
               But with flutes of Fear they filled the ear,
                 As their grisly masque they led,
               And loud they sang, and loud they sang,
                 For they sang to wake the dead.

               "Oho!" they cried, "The world is wide,
                 But fettered limbs go lame!
               And once, or twice, to throw the dice
                 Is a gentlemanly game,
               But he does not win who plays with Sin
                 In the secret House of Shame."
               No things of air these antics were
                 That frolicked with such glee:
               To men whose lives were held in gyves,
                 And whose feet might not go free,
               Ah! wounds of Christ! they were living things,
                 Most terrible to see.
               Around, around, they waltzed and wound;
                 Some wheeled in smirking pairs:
               With the mincing step of demirep
                 Some sidled up the stairs:
               And with subtle sneer, and fawning leer,
                 Each helped us at our prayers.

               The morning wind began to moan,
                 But still the night went on:
               Through its giant loom the web of gloom
                 Crept till each thread was spun:
               And, as we prayed, we grew afraid
                 Of the Justice of the Sun.

               The moaning wind went wandering round
                 The weeping prison-wall:
               Till like a wheel of turning-steel
                 We felt the minutes crawl:
               O moaning wind! what had we done
                 To have such a seneschal?

               At last I saw the shadowed bars
                 Like a lattice wrought in lead,
               Move right across the whitewashed wall
                 That faced my three-plank bed,
               And I knew that somewhere in the world
                 God's dreadful dawn was red.

               At six o'clock we cleaned our cells,
                 At seven all was still,
               But the sough and swing of a mighty wing
                 The prison seemed to fill,
               For the Lord of Death with icy breath
                 Had entered in to kill.

               He did not pass in purple pomp,
                 Nor ride a moon-white steed.
               Three yards of cord and a sliding board
                 Are all the gallows' need:
               So with rope of shame the Herald came
                 To do the secret deed.

               We were as men who through a fen
                 Of filthy darkness grope:
               We did not dare to breathe a prayer,
                 Or give our anguish scope:
               Something was dead in each of us,
                 And what was dead was Hope.

               For Man's grim Justice goes its way,
                 And will not swerve aside:
               It slays the weak, it slays the strong,
                 It has a deadly stride:
               With iron heel it slays the strong,
                 The monstrous parricide!

               We waited for the stroke of eight:
                 Each tongue was thick with thirst:
               For the stroke of eight is the stroke of Fate
                 That makes a man accursed,
               And Fate will use a running noose
                 For the best man and the worst.

               We had no other thing to do,
                 Save to wait for the sign to come:
               So, like things of stone in a valley lone,
                 Quiet we sat and dumb:
               But each man's heart beat thick and quick
                 Like a madman on a drum!

               With sudden shock the prison-clock
                 Smote on the shivering air,
               And from all the gaol rose up a wail
                 Of impotent despair,
               Like the sound that frightened marshes hear
                 From a leper in his lair.

               And as one sees most fearful things
                 In the crystal of a dream,
               We saw the greasy hempen rope
                 Hooked to the blackened beam,
               And heard the prayer the hangman's snare
                 Strangled into a scream.

               And all the woe that moved him so
                 That he gave that bitter cry,
               And the wild regrets, and the bloody sweats,
                 None knew so well as I:
               For he who live more lives than one
                 More deaths than one must die.



               IV.

               There is no chapel on the day
                 On which they hang a man:
               The Chaplain's heart is far too sick,
                 Or his face is far to wan,
               Or there is that written in his eyes
                 Which none should look upon.

               So they kept us close till nigh on noon,
                 And then they rang the bell,
               And the Warders with their jingling keys
                 Opened each listening cell,
               And down the iron stair we tramped,
                 Each from his separate Hell.

               Out into God's sweet air we went,
                 But not in wonted way,
               For this man's face was white with fear,
                 And that man's face was grey,
               And I never saw sad men who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw sad men who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 We prisoners called the sky,
               And at every careless cloud that passed
                 In happy freedom by.

               But there were those amongst us all
                 Who walked with downcast head,
               And knew that, had each got his due,
                 They should have died instead:
               He had but killed a thing that lived
                 Whilst they had killed the dead.

               For he who sins a second time
                 Wakes a dead soul to pain,
               And draws it from its spotted shroud,
                 And makes it bleed again,
               And makes it bleed great gouts of blood
                 And makes it bleed in vain!

               Like ape or clown, in monstrous garb
                 With crooked arrows starred,
               Silently we went round and round
                 The slippery asphalte yard;
               Silently we went round and round,
                 And no man spoke a word.

               Silently we went round and round,
                 And through each hollow mind
               The memory of dreadful things
                 Rushed like a dreadful wind,
               An Horror stalked before each man,
                 And terror crept behind.

               The Warders strutted up and down,
                 And kept their herd of brutes,
               Their uniforms were spick and span,
                 And they wore their Sunday suits,
               But we knew the work they had been at
                 By the quicklime on their boots.

               For where a grave had opened wide,
                 There was no grave at all:
               Only a stretch of mud and sand
                 By the hideous prison-wall,
               And a little heap of burning lime,
                 That the man should have his pall.

               For he has a pall, this wretched man,
                 Such as few men can claim:
               Deep down below a prison-yard,
                 Naked for greater shame,
               He lies, with fetters on each foot,
                 Wrapt in a sheet of flame!

               And all the while the burning lime
                 Eats flesh and bone away,
               It eats the brittle bone by night,
                 And the soft flesh by the day,
               It eats the flesh and bones by turns,
                 But it eats the heart alway.

               For three long years they will not sow
                 Or root or seedling there:
               For three long years the unblessed spot
                 Will sterile be and bare,
               And look upon the wondering sky
                 With unreproachful stare.

               They think a murderer's heart would taint
                 Each simple seed they sow.
               It is not true!  God's kindly earth
                 Is kindlier than men know,
               And the red rose would but blow more red,
                 The white rose whiter blow.

               Out of his mouth a red, red rose!
                 Out of his heart a white!
               For who can say by what strange way,
                 Christ brings his will to light,
               Since the barren staff the pilgrim bore
                 Bloomed in the great Pope's sight?

               But neither milk-white rose nor red
                 May bloom in prison air;
               The shard, the pebble, and the flint,
                 Are what they give us there:
               For flowers have been known to heal
                 A common man's despair.

               So never will wine-red rose or white,
                 Petal by petal, fall
               On that stretch of mud and sand that lies
                 By the hideous prison-wall,
               To tell the men who tramp the yard
                 That God's Son died for all.

               Yet though the hideous prison-wall
                 Still hems him round and round,
               And a spirit may not walk by night
                 That is with fetters bound,
               And a spirit may but weep that lies
                 In such unholy ground,

               He is at peace--this wretched man--
                 At peace, or will be soon:
               There is no thing to make him mad,
                 Nor does Terror walk at noon,
               For the lampless Earth in which he lies
                 Has neither Sun nor Moon.

               They hanged him as a beast is hanged:
                 They did not even toll
               A requiem that might have brought
                 Rest to his startled soul,
               But hurriedly they took him out,
                 And hid him in a hole.

               They stripped him of his canvas clothes,
                 And gave him to the flies;
               They mocked the swollen purple throat
                 And the stark and staring eyes:
               And with laughter loud they heaped the shroud
                 In which their convict lies.

               The Chaplain would not kneel to pray
                 By his dishonored grave:
               Nor mark it with that blessed Cross
                 That Christ for sinners gave,
               Because the man was one of those
                 Whom Christ came down to save.

               Yet all is well; he has but passed
                 To Life's appointed bourne:
               And alien tears will fill for him
                 Pity's long-broken urn,
               For his mourner will be outcast men,
                 And outcasts always mourn.



               V.

               I know not whether Laws be right,
                 Or whether Laws be wrong;
               All that we know who lie in gaol
                 Is that the wall is strong;
               And that each day is like a year,
                 A year whose days are long.

               But this I know, that every Law
                 That men have made for Man,
               Since first Man took his brother's life,
                 And the sad world began,
               But straws the wheat and saves the chaff
                 With a most evil fan.

               This too I know--and wise it were
                 If each could know the same--
               That every prison that men build
                 Is built with bricks of shame,
               And bound with bars lest Christ should see
                 How men their brothers maim.

               With bars they blur the gracious moon,
                 And blind the goodly sun:
               And they do well to hide their Hell,
                 For in it things are done
               That Son of God nor son of Man
                 Ever should look upon!

               The vilest deeds like poison weeds
                 Bloom well in prison-air:
               It is only what is good in Man
                 That wastes and withers there:
               Pale Anguish keeps the heavy gate,
                 And the Warder is Despair

               For they starve the little frightened child
                 Till it weeps both night and day:
               And they scourge the weak, and flog the fool,
                 And gibe the old and grey,
               And some grow mad, and all grow bad,
               And none a word may say.

               Each narrow cell in which we dwell
                 Is a foul and dark latrine,
               And the fetid breath of living Death
                 Chokes up each grated screen,
               And all, but Lust, is turned to dust
                 In Humanity's machine.

               The brackish water that we drink
                 Creeps with a loathsome slime,
               And the bitter bread they weigh in scales
                 Is full of chalk and lime,
               And Sleep will not lie down, but walks
                 Wild-eyed and cries to Time.

               But though lean Hunger and green Thirst
                 Like asp with adder fight,
               We have little care of prison fare,
                 For what chills and kills outright
               Is that every stone one lifts by day
                 Becomes one's heart by night.

               With midnight always in one's heart,
                 And twilight in one's cell,
               We turn the crank, or tear the rope,
                 Each in his separate Hell,
               And the silence is more awful far
                 Than the sound of a brazen bell.

               And never a human voice comes near
                 To speak a gentle word:
               And the eye that watches through the door
                 Is pitiless and hard:
               And by all forgot, we rot and rot,
                 With soul and body marred.

               And thus we rust Life's iron chain
                 Degraded and alone:
               And some men curse, and some men weep,
                 And some men make no moan:
               But God's eternal Laws are kind
                 And break the heart of stone.

               And every human heart that breaks,
                 In prison-cell or yard,
               Is as that broken box that gave
                 Its treasure to the Lord,
               And filled the unclean leper's house
                 With the scent of costliest nard.

               Ah! happy day they whose hearts can break
                 And peace of pardon win!
               How else may man make straight his plan
                 And cleanse his soul from Sin?
               How else but through a broken heart
                 May Lord Christ enter in?

               And he of the swollen purple throat.
                 And the stark and staring eyes,
               Waits for the holy hands that took
                 The Thief to Paradise;
               And a broken and a contrite heart
                 The Lord will not despise.

               The man in red who reads the Law
                 Gave him three weeks of life,
               Three little weeks in which to heal
                 His soul of his soul's strife,
               And cleanse from every blot of blood
                 The hand that held the knife.

               And with tears of blood he cleansed the hand,
                 The hand that held the steel:
               For only blood can wipe out blood,
                 And only tears can heal:
               And the crimson stain that was of Cain
                 Became Christ's snow-white seal.



               VI.

               In Reading gaol by Reading town
                 There is a pit of shame,
               And in it lies a wretched man
                 Eaten by teeth of flame,
               In burning winding-sheet he lies,
                 And his grave has got no name.

               And there, till Christ call forth the dead,
                 In silence let him lie:
               No need to waste the foolish tear,
                 Or heave the windy sigh:
               The man had killed the thing he loved,
                 And so he had to die.

               And all men kill the thing they love,
                 By all let this be heard,
               Some do it with a bitter look,
                 Some with a flattering word,
               The coward does it with a kiss,
                 The brave man with a sword!





Version Two


                               I

               He did not wear his scarlet coat,
                 For blood and wine are red,
               And blood and wine were on his hands
                 When they found him with the dead,
               The poor dead woman whom he loved,
                 And murdered in her bed.

               He walked amongst the Trial Men
                 In a suit of shabby gray;
               A cricket cap was on his head,
                 And his step seemed light and gay;
               But I never saw a man who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw a man who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 Which prisoners call the sky,
               And at every drifting cloud that went
                 With sails of silver by.

               I walked, with other souls in pain,
                 Within another ring,
               And was wondering if the man had done
                 A great or little thing,
               When a voice behind me whispered low,
                 "That fellow's got to swing."

               Dear Christ! the very prison walls
                 Suddenly seemed to reel,
               And the sky above my head became
                 Like a casque of scorching steel;
               And, though I was a soul in pain,
                 My pain I could not feel.

               I only knew what haunted thought
                 Quickened his step, and why
               He looked upon the garish day
                 With such a wistful eye;
               The man had killed the thing he loved,
                 And so he had to die.

               Yet each man kills the thing he loves,
                 By each let this be heard,
               Some do it with a bitter look,
                 Some with a flattering word,
               The coward does it with a kiss,
                 The brave man with a sword!

               Some kill their love when they are young,
                 And some when they are old;
               Some strangle with the hands of Lust,
                 Some with the hands of Gold:
               The kindest use a knife, because
                 The dead so soon grow cold.

               Some love too little, some too long,
                 Some sell, and others buy;
               Some do the deed with many tears,
                 And some without a sigh:
               For each man kills the thing he loves,
                 Yet each man does not die.

               He does not die a death of shame
                 On a day of dark disgrace,
               Nor have a noose about his neck,
                 Nor a cloth upon his face,
               Nor drop feet foremost through the floor
                 Into an empty space.

               He does not sit with silent men
                 Who watch him night and day;
               Who watch him when he tries to weep,
                 And when he tries to pray;
               Who watch him lest himself should rob
                 The prison of its prey.

               He does not wake at dawn to see
                 Dread figures throng his room,
               The shivering Chaplain robed in white,
                 The Sheriff stern with gloom,
               And the Governor all in shiny black,
                 With the yellow face of Doom.

               He does not rise in piteous haste
                 To put on convict-clothes,
               While some coarse-mouthed Doctor gloats, and notes
                 Each new and nerve-twitched pose,
               Fingering a watch whose little ticks
                 Are like horrible hammer-blows.

               He does not feel that sickening thirst
                 That sands one's throat, before
               The hangman with his gardener's gloves
                 Comes through the padded door,
               And binds one with three leathern thongs,
               That the throat may thirst no more.

               He does not bend his head to hear
                 The Burial Office read,
               Nor, while the anguish of his soul
                 Tells him he is not dead,
               Cross his own coffin, as he moves
                 Into the hideous shed.

               He does not stare upon the air
                 Through a little roof of glass:
               He does not pray with lips of clay
                 For his agony to pass;
               Nor feel upon his shuddering cheek
                 The kiss of Caiaphas.



                               II

               Six weeks the guardsman walked the yard,
                 In the suit of shabby gray:
               His cricket cap was on his head,
                 And his step was light and gay,
               But I never saw a man who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw a man who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 Which prisoners call the sky,
               And at every wandering cloud that trailed
                 Its ravelled fleeces by.

               He did not wring his hands, as do
                 Those witless men who dare
               To try to rear the changeling Hope
                 In the cave of black Despair:
               He only looked upon the sun,
                 And drank the morning air.

               He did not wring his hands nor weep,
                 Nor did he peek or pine,
               But he drank the air as though it held
                 Some healthful anodyne;
               With open mouth he drank the sun
                 As though it had been wine!

               And I and all the souls in pain,
                 Who tramped the other ring,
               Forgot if we ourselves had done
                 A great or little thing,
               And watched with gaze of dull amaze
                 The man who had to swing.

               For strange it was to see him pass
                 With a step so light and gay,
               And strange it was to see him look
                 So wistfully at the day,
               And strange it was to think that he
                 Had such a debt to pay.

               The oak and elm have pleasant leaves
                 That in the spring-time shoot:
               But grim to see is the gallows-tree,
                 With its alder-bitten root,
               And, green or dry, a man must die
                 Before it bears its fruit!

               The loftiest place is the seat of grace
                 For which all worldlings try:
               But who would stand in hempen band
                 Upon a scaffold high,
               And through a murderer's collar take
                 His last look at the sky?

               It is sweet to dance to violins
                 When Love and Life are fair:
               To dance to flutes, to dance to lutes
                 Is delicate and rare:
               But it is not sweet with nimble feet
                 To dance upon the air!

               So with curious eyes and sick surmise
                 We watched him day by day,
               And wondered if each one of us
                 Would end the self-same way,
               For none can tell to what red Hell
                 His sightless soul may stray.

               At last the dead man walked no more
                 Amongst the Trial Men,
               And I knew that he was standing up
                 In the black dock's dreadful pen,
               And that never would I see his face
                 For weal or woe again.

               Like two doomed ships that pass in storm
                 We had crossed each other's way:
               But we made no sign, we said no word,
                 We had no word to say;
               For we did not meet in the holy night,
                 But in the shameful day.

               A prison wall was round us both,
                 Two outcast men we were:
               The world had thrust us from its heart,
                 And God from out His care:
               And the iron gin that waits for Sin
                 Had caught us in its snare.
                              III

               In Debtors' Yard the stones are hard,
                 And the dripping wall is high,
               So it was there he took the air
                 Beneath the leaden sky,
               And by each side a warder walked,
                 For fear the man might die.

               Or else he sat with those who watched
                 His anguish night and day;
               Who watched him when he rose to weep,
                 And when he crouched to pray;
               Who watched him lest himself should rob
                 Their scaffold of its prey.

               The Governor was strong upon
                 The Regulations Act:
               The Doctor said that Death was but
                 A scientific fact:
               And twice a day the Chaplain called,
                 And left a little tract.

               And twice a day he smoked his pipe,
                 And drank his quart of beer:
               His soul was resolute, and held
                 No hiding-place for fear;
               He often said that he was glad
                 The hangman's day was near.

               But why he said so strange a thing
                 No warder dared to ask:
               For he to whom a watcher's doom
                 Is given as his task,
               Must set a lock upon his lips,
                 And make his face a mask.

               Or else he might be moved, and try
                 To comfort or console:
               And what should Human Pity do
                 Pent up in Murderers' Hole?
               What word of grace in such a place
                 Could help a brother's soul?

               With slouch and swing around the ring
                 We trod the Fools' Parade!
               We did not care: we knew we were
                 The Devils' Own Brigade:
               And shaven head and feet of lead
                 Make a merry masquerade.

               We tore the tarry rope to shreds
                 With blunt and bleeding nails;
               We rubbed the doors, and scrubbed the floors,
                 And cleaned the shining rails:
               And, rank by rank, we soaped the plank,
                 And clattered with the pails.

               We sewed the sacks, we broke the stones,
                 We turned the dusty drill:
               We banged the tins, and bawled the hymns,
                 And sweated on the mill:
               But in the heart of every man
                 Terror was lying still.

               So still it lay that every day
                 Crawled like a weed-clogged wave:
               And we forgot the bitter lot
                 That waits for fool and knave,
               Till once, as we tramped in from work,
                 We passed an open grave.

               With yawning mouth the horrid hole
                 Gaped for a living thing;
               The very mud cried out for blood
                 To the thirsty asphalte ring:
               And we knew that ere one dawn grew fair
                 The fellow had to swing.

               Right in we went, with soul intent
                 On Death and Dread and Doom:
               The hangman, with his little bag,
                 Went shuffling through the gloom:
               And I trembled as I groped my way
                 Into my numbered tomb.

               That night the empty corridors
                 Were full of forms of Fear,
               And up and down the iron town
                 Stole feet we could not hear,
               And through the bars that hide the stars
                 White faces seemed to peer.

               He lay as one who lies and dreams
                 In a pleasant meadow-land,
               The watchers watched him as he slept,
                 And could not understand
               How one could sleep so sweet a sleep
                 With a hangman close at hand.

               But there is no sleep when men must weep
                 Who never yet have wept:
               So we- the fool, the fraud, the knave-
                 That endless vigil kept,
               And through each brain on hands of pain
                 Another's terror crept.

               Alas! it is a fearful thing
                 To feel another's guilt!
               For, right within, the sword of Sin
                 Pierced to its poisoned hilt,
               And as molten lead were the tears we shed
                 For the blood we had not spilt.

               The warders with their shoes of felt
                 Crept by each padlocked door,
               And peeped and saw, with eyes of awe,
                 Gray figures on the floor,
               And wondered why men knelt to pray
                 Who never prayed before.

               All through the night we knelt and prayed,
                 Mad mourners of a corse!
               The troubled plumes of midnight shook
                 Like the plumes upon a hearse:
               And as bitter wine upon a sponge
                 Was the savour of Remorse.

               The gray cock crew, the red cock crew,
                 But never came the day:
               And crooked shapes of Terror crouched,
                 In the corners where we lay:
               And each evil sprite that walks by night
                 Before us seemed to play.

               They glided past, the glided fast,
                 Like travellers through a mist:
               They mocked the moon in a rigadoon
                 Of delicate turn and twist,
               And with formal pace and loathsome grace
                 The phantoms kept their tryst.

               With mop and mow, we saw them go,
                 Slim shadows hand in hand:
               About, about, in ghostly rout
                 They trod a saraband:
               And the damned grotesques made arabesques,
                 Like the wind upon the sand!

               With the pirouettes of marionettes,
                 They tripped on pointed tread:
               But with flutes of Fear they filled the ear,
                 As their grisly masque they led,
               And loud they sang, and long they sang,
                 For they sang to wake the dead.

               "Oho!" they cried, "the world is wide,
                 But fettered limbs go lame!
               And once, or twice, to throw the dice
                 Is a gentlemanly game,
               But he does not win who plays with Sin
                 In the secret House of Shame."

               No things of air these antics were,
                 That frolicked with such glee:
               To men whose lives were held in gyves,
                 And whose feet might not go free,
               Ah! wounds of Christ! they were living things,
                 Most terrible to see.

               Around, around, they waltzed and wound;
                 Some wheeled in smirking pairs;
               With the mincing step of a demirep
                 Some sidled up the stairs:
               And with subtle sneer, and fawning leer,
                 Each helped us at our prayers.

               The morning wind began to moan,
                 But still the night went on:
               Through its giant loom the web of gloom
                 Crept till each thread was spun:
               And, as we prayed, we grew afraid
                 Of the Justice of the Sun.

               The moaning wind went wandering round
                 The weeping prison wall:
               Till like a wheel of turning steel
                 We felt the minutes crawl:
               O moaning wind! what had we done
                 To have such a seneschal?

               At last I saw the shadowed bars,
                 Like a lattice wrought in lead,
               Move right across the whitewashed wall
                 That faced my three-plank bed,
               And I knew that somewhere in the world
                 God's dreadful dawn was red.

               At six o'clock we cleaned our cells,
                 At seven all was still,
               But the sough and swing of a mighty wing
                 The prison seemed to fill,
               For the Lord of Death with icy breath
                 Had entered in to kill.

               He did not pass in purple pomp,
                 Nor ride a moon-white steed.
               Three yards of cord and a sliding board
                 Are all the gallows' need:
               So with rope of shame the Herald came
                 To do the secret deed.

               We were as men who through a fen
                 Of filthy darkness grope:
               We did not dare to breathe a prayer,
                 Or to give our anguish scope:
               Something was dead in each of us,
                 And what was dead was Hope.

               For Man's grim Justice goes its way
                 And will not swerve aside:
               It slays the weak, it slays the strong,
                 It has a deadly stride:
               With iron heel it slays the strong
                 The monstrous parricide!

               We waited for the stroke of eight:
                 Each tongue was thick with thirst:
               For the stroke of eight is the stroke of Fate
                 That makes a man accursed,
               And Fate will use a running noose
                 For the best man and the worst.

               We had no other thing to do,
                 Save to wait for the sign to come:
               So, like things of stone in a valley lone,
                 Quiet we sat and dumb:
               But each man's heart beat thick and quick,
                 Like a madman on a drum!

               With sudden shock the prison-clock
                 Smote on the shivering air,
               And from all the gaol rose up a wail
                 Of impotent despair,
               Like the sound the frightened marshes hear
                 From some leper in his lair.

               And as one sees most fearful things
                 In the crystal of a dream,
               We saw the greasy hempen rope
                 Hooked to the blackened beam,
               And heard the prayer the hangman's snare
                 Strangled into a scream.

               And all the woe that moved him so
                 That he gave that bitter cry,
               And the wild regrets, and the bloody sweats,
                 None knew so well as I:
               For he who lives more lives than one
                 More deaths that one must die.
                               IV

               There is no chapel on the day
                 On which they hang a man:
               The Chaplain's heart is far too sick,
                 Or his face is far too wan,
               Or there is that written in his eyes
                 Which none should look upon.

               So they kept us close till nigh on noon,
                 And then they rang the bell,
               And the warders with their jingling keys
                 Opened each listening cell,
               And down the iron stair we tramped,
                 Each from his separate Hell.

               Out into God's sweet air we went,
                 But not in wonted way,
               For this man's face was white with fear,
                 And that man's face was gray,
               And I never saw sad men who looked
                 So wistfully at the day.

               I never saw sad men who looked
                 With such a wistful eye
               Upon that little tent of blue
                 We prisoners called the sky,
               And at every happy cloud that passed
                 In such strange freedom by.

               But there were those amongst us all
                 Who walked with downcast head,
               And knew that, had each got his due,
                 They should have died instead:
               He had but killed a thing that lived,
                 Whilst they had killed the dead.

               For he who sins a second time
                 Wakes a dead soul to pain,
               And draws it from its spotted shroud
                 And makes it bleed again,
               And makes it bleed great gouts of blood,
                 And makes it bleed in vain!

               Like ape or clown, in monstrous garb
                 With crooked arrows starred,
               Silently we went round and round
                 The slippery asphalte yard;
               Silently we went round and round,
                 And no man spoke a word.

               Silently we went round and round,
                 And through each hollow mind
               The Memory of dreadful things
                 Rushed like a dreadful wind,
               And Horror stalked before each man,
                 And Terror crept behind.

               The warders strutted up and down,
                 And watched their herd of brutes,
               Their uniforms were spick and span,
                 And they wore their Sunday suits,
               But we knew the work they had been at,
                 By the quicklime on their boots.

               For where a grave had opened wide,
                 There was no grave at all:
               Only a stretch of mud and sand
                 By the hideous prison-wall,
               And a little heap of burning lime,
                 That the man should have his pall.

               For he has a pall, this wretched man,
                 Such as few men can claim:
               Deep down below a prison-yard,
                 Naked, for greater shame,
               He lies, with fetters on each foot,
                 Wrapt in a sheet of flame!

               And all the while the burning lime
                 Eats flesh and bone away,
               It eats the brittle bones by night,
                 And the soft flesh by day,
               It eats the flesh and bone by turns,
                 But it eats the heart alway.

               For three long years they will not sow
                 Or root or seedling there:
               For three long years the unblessed spot
                 Will sterile be and bare,
               And look upon the wondering sky
                 With unreproachful stare.

               They think a murderer's heart would taint
                 Each simple seed they sow.
               It is not true! God's kindly earth
                 Is kindlier than men know,
               And the red rose would but glow more red,
                 The white rose whiter blow.

               Out of his mouth a red, red rose!
                 Out of his heart a white!
               For who can say by what strange way,
                 Christ brings His will to light,
               Since the barren staff the pilgrim bore
                 Bloomed in the great Pope's sight?

               But neither milk-white rose nor red
                 May bloom in prison air;
               The shard, the pebble, and the flint,
                 Are what they give us there:
               For flowers have been known to heal
                 A common man's despair.

               So never will wine-red rose or white,
                 Petal by petal, fall
               On that stretch of mud and sand that lies
                 By the hideous prison-wall,
               To tell the men who tramp the yard
                 That God's Son died for all.

               Yet though the hideous prison-wall
                 Still hems him round and round,
               And a spirit may not walk by night
                 That is with fetters bound,
               And a spirit may but weep that lies
                 In such unholy ground,

               He is at peace- this wretched man-
                 At peace, or will be soon:
               There is no thing to make him mad,
                 Nor does Terror walk at noon,
               For the lampless Earth in which he lies
                 Has neither Sun nor Moon.

               They hanged him as a beast is hanged:
                 They did not even toll
               A requiem that might have brought
                 Rest to his startled soul,
               But hurriedly they took him out,
                 And hid him in a hole.

               The warders stripped him of his clothes,
                 And gave him to the flies:
               They mocked the swollen purple throat,
                 And the stark and staring eyes:
               And with laughter loud they heaped the shroud
                 In which the convict lies.

               The Chaplain would not kneel to pray
                 By his dishonoured grave:
               Nor mark it with that blessed Cross
                 That Christ for sinners gave,
               Because the man was one of those
                 Whom Christ came down to save.

               Yet all is well; he has but passed
                 To  Life's appointed bourne:
               And alien tears will fill for him
                 Pity's long-broken urn,
               For his mourners be outcast men,
                 And outcasts always mourn.
                               V

               I know not whether Laws be right,
                 Or whether Laws be wrong;
               All that we know who lie in gaol
                 Is that the wall is strong;
               And that each day is like a year,
                 A year whose days are long.

               But this I know, that every Law
                 That men have made for Man,
               Since first Man took His brother's life,
                 And the sad world began,
               But straws the wheat and saves the chaff
                 With a most evil fan.

               This too I know- and wise it were
                 If each could know the same-
               That every prison that men build
                 Is built with bricks of shame,
               And bound with bars lest Christ should see
                 How men their brothers maim.

               With bars they blur the gracious moon,
                 And blind the goodly sun:
               And the do well to hide their Hell,
                 For in it things are done
               That Son of things nor son of Man
                 Ever should look upon!

               The vilest deeds like poison weeds
                 Bloom well in prison-air:
               It is only what is good in Man
                 That wastes and withers there:
               Pale Anguish keeps the heavy gate,
                 And the warder is Despair.

               For they starve the little frightened child
                 Till it weeps both night and day:
               And they scourge the weak, and flog the fool,
                 And gibe the old and gray,
               And some grow mad, and all grow bad,
                 And none a word may say.

               Each narrow cell in which we dwell
                 Is a foul and dark latrine,
               And the fetid breath of living Death
                 Chokes up each grated screen,
               And all, but Lust, is turned to dust
                 In Humanity's machine.

               The brackish water that we drink
                 Creeps with a loathsome slime,
               And the bitter bread they weigh in scales
                 Is full of chalk and lime,
               And Sleep will not lie down, but walks
                 Wild-eyed, and cries to Time.

               But though lean Hunger and green Thirst
                 Like asp with adder fight,
               We have little care of prison fare,
                 For what chills and kills outright
               Is that every stone one lifts by day
                 Becomes one's heart by night.

               With midnight always in one's heart,
                 And twilight in one's cell,
               We turn the crank, or tear the rope,
                 Each in his separate Hell,
               And the silence is more awful far
                 Than the sound of a brazen bell.

               And never a human voice comes near
                 To speak a gentle word:
               And the eye that watches through the door
                 Is pitiless and hard:
               And by all forgot, we rot and rot,
                 With soul and body marred.

               And thus we rust Life's iron chain
                 Degraded and alone:
               And some men curse, and some men weep,
                 And some men make no moan:
               But God's eternal Laws are kind
                 And break the heart of stone.

               And every human heart that breaks,
                 In prison-cell or yard,
               Is as that broken box that gave
                 Its treasure to the Lord,
               And filled the unclean leper's house
                 With the scent of costliest nard.

               Ah! happy they whose hearts can break
                 And peace of pardon win!
               How else may man make straight his plan
                 And cleanse his soul from Sin?
               How else but through a broken heart
                 May Lord Christ enter in?

               And he of the swollen purple throat,
                 And the stark and staring eyes,
               Waits for the holy hands that took
                 The Thief to Paradise;
               And a broken and a contrite heart
                 The Lord will not despise.

               The man in red who reads the Law
                 Gave him three weeks of life,
               Three little weeks in which to heal
                 His soul of his soul's strife,
               And cleanse from every blot of blood
                 The hand that held the knife.

               And with tears of blood he cleansed the hand,
                 The hand that held the steel:
               For only blood can wipe out blood,
                 And only tears can heal:
               And the crimson stain that was of Cain
                 Became Christ's snow-white seal.
                               VI

               In Reading gaol by Reading town
                 There is a pit of shame,
               And in it lies a wretched man
                 Eaten by teeth of flame,
               In a burning winding-sheet he lies,
                 And his grave has got no name.

               And there, till Christ call forth the dead,
                 In silence let him lie:
               No need to waste the foolish tear,
                 Or heave the windy sigh:
               The man had killed the thing he loved,
                 And so he had to die.

               And all men kill the thing they love,
                 By all let this be heard,
               Some do it with a bitter look,
                 Some with a flattering word,
               The coward does it with a kiss,
                 The brave man with a sword!


               THE END


PHRASES AND PHILOSOPHIES FOR THE USE OF THE YOUNG



The first duty in life is to be as artificial as possible.  What
the second duty is no one has as yet discovered.

Wickedness is a myth invented by good people to account for the
curious attractiveness of others.

If the poor only had profiles there would be no difficulty in
solving the problem of poverty.

Those who see any difference between soul and body have neither.

A really well-made buttonhole is the only link between Art and
Nature.

Religions die when they are proved to be true.  Science is the
record of dead religions.

The well-bred contradict other people.  The wise contradict
themselves.

Nothing that actually occurs is of the smallest importance.

Dulness is the coming of age of seriousness.

In all unimportant matters, style, not sincerity, is the essential.
In all important matters, style, not sincerity, is the essential.

If one tells the truth one is sure, sooner or later, to be found
out.

Pleasure is the only thing one should live for.  Nothing ages like
happiness.

It is only by not paying one's bills that one can hope to live in
the memory of the commercial classes.

No crime is vulgar, but all vulgarity is crime.  Vulgarity is the
conduct of others.

Only the shallow know themselves.

Time is waste of money.

One should always be a little improbable.

There is a fatality about all good resolutions.  They are
invariably made too soon.

The only way to atone for being occasionally a little overdressed
is by being always absolutely overeducated.

To be premature is to be perfect.

Any preoccupation with ideas of what is right or wrong in conduct
shows an arrested intellectual development.

Ambition is the last refuge of the failure.

A truth ceases to be true when more than one person believes in it.

In examinations the foolish ask questions that the wise cannot
answer.

Greek dress was in its essence inartistic.  Nothing should reveal
the body but the body.

One should either be a work of art, or wear a work of art.

It is only the superficial qualities that last.  Man's deeper
nature is soon found out.

Industry is the root of all ugliness.

The ages live in history through their anachronisms.

It is only the gods who taste of death.  Apollo has passed away,
but Hyacinth, whom men say he slew, lives on.  Nero and Narcissus
are always with us.

The old believe everything:  the middle-aged suspect everything;
the young know everything.

The condition of perfection is idleness:  the aim of perfection is
youth.

Only the great masters of style ever succeeded in being obscure.

There is something tragic about the enormous number of young men
there are in England at the present moment who start life with
perfect profiles, and end by adopting some useful profession.

To love oneself is the beginning of a life-long romance.



MRS. LANGTRY AS HESTER GRAZEBROOK



It is only in the best Greek gems, on the silver coins of Syracuse,
or among the marble figures of the Parthenon frieze, that one can
find the ideal representation of the marvellous beauty of that face
which laughed through the leaves last night as Hester Grazebrook.

Pure Greek it is, with the grave low forehead, the exquisitely
arched brow; the noble chiselling of the mouth, shaped as if it
were the mouthpiece of an instrument of music; the supreme and
splendid curve of the cheek; the augustly pillared throat which
bears it all:  it is Greek, because the lines which compose it are
so definite and so strong, and yet so exquisitely harmonized that
the effect is one of simple loveliness purely:  Greek, because its
essence and its quality, as is the quality of music and of
architecture, is that of beauty based on absolutely mathematical
laws.

But while art remains dumb and immobile in its passionless
serenity, with the beauty of this face it is different:  the grey
eyes lighten into blue or deepen into violet as fancy succeeds
fancy; the lips become flower-like in laughter or, tremulous as a
bird's wing, mould themselves at last into the strong and bitter
moulds of pain or scorn.  And then motion comes, and the statue
wakes into life.  But the life is not the ordinary life of common
days; it is life with a new value given to it, the value of art:
and the charm to me of Hester Grazebrook's acting in the first
scene of the play last night was that mingling of classic grace
with absolute reality which is the secret of all beautiful art, of
the plastic work of the Greeks and of the pictures of Jean Francois
Millet equally.

I do not think that the sovereignty and empire of women's beauty
has at all passed away, though we may no longer go to war for them
as the Greeks did for the daughter of Leda.  The greatest empire
still remains for them--the empire of art.  And, indeed, this
wonderful face, seen last night for the first time in America, has
filled and permeated with the pervading image of its type the whole
of our modern art in England.  Last century it was the romantic
type which dominated in art, the type loved by Reynolds and
Gainsborough, of wonderful contrasts of colour, of exquisite and
varying charm of expression, but without that definite plastic
feeling which divides classic from romantic work.  This type
degenerated into mere facile prettiness in the hands of lesser
masters, and, in protest against it, was created by the hands of
the Pre-Raphaelites a new type, with its rare combination of Greek
form with Florentine mysticism.  But this mysticism becomes over-
strained and a burden, rather than an aid to expression, and a
desire for the pure Hellenic joy and serenity came in its place;
and in all our modern work, in the paintings of such men as Albert
Moore and Leighton and Whistler, we can trace the influence of this
single face giving fresh life and inspiration in the form of a new
artistic ideal.



SLAVES OF FASHION



Miss Leffler-Arnim's statement, in a lecture delivered recently at
St. Saviour's Hospital, that "she had heard of instances where
ladies were so determined not to exceed the fashionable measurement
that they had actually held on to a cross-bar while their maids
fastened the fifteen-inch corset," has excited a good deal of
incredulity, but there is nothing really improbable in it.  From
the sixteenth century to our own day there is hardly any form of
torture that has not been inflicted on girls, and endured by women,
in obedience to the dictates of an unreasonable and monstrous
Fashion.  "In order to obtain a real Spanish figure," says
Montaigne, "what a Gehenna of suffering will not women endure,
drawn in and compressed by great coches entering the flesh; nay,
sometimes they even die thereof!"  "A few days after my arrival at
school," Mrs. Somerville tells us in her memoirs, "although
perfectly straight and well made, I was enclosed in stiff stays,
with a steel busk in front; while above my frock, bands drew my
shoulders back till the shoulder-blades met.  Then a steel rod with
a semi-circle, which went under my chin, was clasped to the steel
busk in my stays.  In this constrained state I and most of the
younger girls had to prepare our lessons"; and in the life of Miss
Edgeworth we read that, being sent to a certain fashionable
establishment, "she underwent all the usual tortures of back-
boards, iron collars and dumbs, and also (because she was a very
tiny person) the unusual one of being hung by the neck to draw out
the muscles and increase the growth," a signal failure in her case.
Indeed, instances of absolute mutilation and misery are so common
in the past that it is unnecessary to multiply them; but it is
really sad to think that in our own day a civilized woman can hang
on to a cross-bar while her maid laces her waist into a fifteen-
inch circle.  To begin with, the waist is not a circle at all, but
an oval; nor can there be any greater error than to imagine that an
unnaturally small waist gives an air of grace, or even of
slightness, to the whole figure.  Its effect, as a rule, is simply
to exaggerate the width of the shoulders and the hips; and those
whose figures possess that stateliness which is called stoutness by
the vulgar, convert what is a quality into a defect by yielding to
the silly edicts of Fashion on the subject of tight-lacing.  The
fashionable English waist, also, is not merely far too small, and
consequently quite out of proportion to the rest of the figure, but
it is worn far too low down.  I use the expression "worn"
advisedly, for a waist nowadays seems to be regarded as an article
of apparel to be put on when and where one likes.  A long waist
always implies shortness of the lower limbs, and, from the artistic
point of view, has the effect of diminishing the height; and I am
glad to see that many of the most charming women in Paris are
returning to the idea of the Directoire style of dress.  This style
is not by any means perfect, but at least it has the merit of
indicating the proper position of the waist.  I feel quite sure
that all English women of culture and position will set their faces
against such stupid and dangerous practices as are related by Miss
Leffler-Arnim.  Fashion's motto is:  Il faut souffrir pour etre
belle; but the motto of art and of common-sense is:  Il faut etre
bete pour souffrir.

Talking of Fashion, a critic in the Pall Mall Gazelle expresses his
surprise that I should have allowed an illustration of a hat,
covered with "the bodies of dead birds," to appear in the first
number of the Woman's World; and as I have received many letters on
the subject, it is only right that I should state my exact position
in the matter.  Fashion is such an essential part of the mundus
muliebris of our day, that it seems to me absolutely necessary that
its growth, development, and phases should be duly chronicled; and
the historical and practical value of such a record depends
entirely upon its perfect fidelity to fact.  Besides, it is quite
easy for the children of light to adapt almost any fashionable form
of dress to the requirements of utility and the demands of good
taste.  The Sarah Bernhardt tea-gown, for instance, figured in the
present issue, has many good points about it, and the gigantic
dress-improver does not appear to me to be really essential to the
mode; and though the Postillion costume of the fancy dress ball is
absolutely detestable in its silliness and vulgarity, the so-called
Late Georgian costume in the same plate is rather pleasing.  I
must, however, protest against the idea that to chronicle the
development of Fashion implies any approval of the particular forms
that Fashion may adopt.



WOMAN'S DRESS



The "Girl Graduate" must of course have precedence, not merely for
her sex but for her sanity:  her letter is extremely sensible.  She
makes two points:  that high heels are a necessity for any lady who
wishes to keep her dress clean from the Stygian mud of our streets,
and that without a tight corset the ordinary number of petticoats
and etceteras' cannot be properly or conveniently held up.  Now, it
is quite true that as long as the lower garments are suspended from
the hips a corset is an absolute necessity; the mistake lies in not
suspending all apparel from the shoulders.  In the latter case a
corset becomes useless, the body is left free and unconfined for
respiration and motion, there is more health, and consequently more
beauty.  Indeed all the most ungainly and uncomfortable articles of
dress that fashion has ever in her folly prescribed, not the tight
corset merely, but the farthingale, the vertugadin, the hoop, the
crinoline, and that modern monstrosity the so-called "dress
improver" also, all of them have owed their origin to the same
error, the error of not seeing that it is from the shoulders, and
from the shoulders only, that all garments should be hung.

And as regards high heels, I quite admit that some additional
height to the shoe or boot is necessary if long gowns are to be
worn in the street; but what I object to is that the height should
be given to the heel only, and not to the sole of the foot also.
The modern high-heeled boot is, in fact, merely the clog of the
time of Henry VI., with the front prop left out, and its inevitable
effect is to throw the body forward, to shorten the steps, and
consequently to produce that want of grace which always follows
want of freedom.

Why should clogs be despised?  Much art has been expended on clogs.
They have been made of lovely woods, and delicately inlaid with
ivory, and with mother-of-pearl.  A clog might be a dream of
beauty, and, if not too high or too heavy, most comfortable also.
But if there be any who do not like clogs, let them try some
adaptation of the trouser of the Turkish lady, which is loose round
the limb and tight at the ankle.

The "Girl Graduate," with a pathos to which I am not insensible,
entreats me not to apotheosize "that awful, befringed, beflounced,
and bekilted divided skirt."  Well, I will acknowledge that the
fringes, the flounces, and the kilting do certainly defeat the
whole object of the dress, which is that of ease and liberty; but I
regard these things as mere wicked superfluities, tragic proofs
that the divided skirt is ashamed of its own division.  The
principle of the dress is good, and, though it is not by any means
perfection, it is a step towards it.

Here I leave the "Girl Graduate," with much regret, for Mr.
Wentworth Huyshe.  Mr. Huyshe makes the old criticism that Greek
dress is unsuited to our climate, and, to me the somewhat new
assertion, that the men's dress of a hundred years ago was
preferable to that of the second part of the seventeenth century,
which I consider to have been the exquisite period of English
costume.

Now, as regards the first of these two statements, I will say, to
begin with, that the warmth of apparel does not depend really on
the number of garments worn, but on the material of which they are
made.  One of the chief faults of modern dress is that it is
composed of far too many articles of clothing, most of which are of
the wrong substance; but over a substratum of pure wool, such as is
supplied by Dr. Jaeger under the modern German system, some
modification of Greek costume is perfectly applicable to our
climate, our country and our century.  This important fact has
already been pointed out by Mr. E. W. Godwin in his excellent,
though too brief handbook on Dress, contributed to the Health
Exhibition.  I call it an important fact because it makes almost
any form of lovely costume perfectly practicable in our cold
climate.  Mr. Godwin, it is true, points out that the English
ladies of the thirteenth century abandoned after some time the
flowing garments of the early Renaissance in favour of a tighter
mode, such as Northern Europe seems to demand.  This I quite admit,
and its significance; but what I contend, and what I am sure Mr.
Godwin would agree with me in, is that the principles, the laws of
Greek dress may be perfectly realized, even in a moderately tight
gown with sleeves:  I mean the principle of suspending all apparel
from the shoulders, and of relying for beauty of effect not on the
stiff ready-made ornaments of the modern milliner--the bows where
there should be no bows, and the flounces where there should be no
flounces--but on the exquisite play of light and line that one gets
from rich and rippling folds.  I am not proposing any antiquarian
revival of an ancient costume, but trying merely to point out the
right laws of dress, laws which are dictated by art and not by
archaeology, by science and not by fashion; and just as the best
work of art in our days is that which combines classic grace with
absolute reality, so from a continuation of the Greek principles of
beauty with the German principles of health will come, I feel
certain, the costume of the future.

And now to the question of men's dress, or rather to Mr. Huyshe's
claim of the superiority, in point of costume, of the last quarter
of the eighteenth century over the second quarter of the
seventeenth.  The broad-brimmed hat of 1640 kept the rain of winter
and the glare of summer from the face; the same cannot be said of
the hat of one hundred years ago, which, with its comparatively
narrow brim and high crown, was the precursor of the modern
"chimney-pot":  a wide turned-down collar is a healthier thing than
a strangling stock, and a short cloak much more comfortable than a
sleeved overcoat, even though the latter may have had "three
capes"; a cloak is easier to put on and off, lies lightly on the
shoulder in summer, and wrapped round one in winter keeps one
perfectly warm.  A doublet, again, is simpler than a coat and
waistcoat; instead of two garments one has one; by not being open
also it protects the chest better.

Short loose trousers are in every way to be preferred to the tight
knee-breeches which often impede the proper circulation of the
blood; and finally, the soft leather boots which could be worn
above or below the knee, are more supple, and give consequently
more freedom, than the stiff Hessian which Mr. Huyshe so praises.
I say nothing about the question of grace and picturesqueness, for
I suppose that no one, not even Mr. Huyshe, would prefer a
maccaroni to a cavalier, a Lawrence to a Vandyke, or the third
George to the first Charles; but for ease, warmth and comfort this
seventeenth-century dress is infinitely superior to anything that
came after it, and I do not think it is excelled by any preceding
form of costume.  I sincerely trust that we may soon see in England
some national revival of it.



MORE RADICAL IDEAS UPON DRESS REFORM



I have been much interested at reading the large amount of
correspondence that has been called forth by my recent lecture on
Dress.  It shows me that the subject of dress reform is one that is
occupying many wise and charming people, who have at heart the
principles of health, freedom, and beauty in costume, and I hope
that "H. B. T." and "Materfamilias" will have all the real
influence which their letters--excellent letters both of them--
certainly deserve.

I turn first to Mr. Huyshe's second letter, and the drawing that
accompanies it; but before entering into any examination of the
theory contained in each, I think I should state at once that I
have absolutely no idea whether this gentleman wears his hair long
or short, or his cuffs back or forward, or indeed what he is like
at all.  I hope he consults his own comfort and wishes in
everything which has to do with his dress, and is allowed to enjoy
that individualism in apparel which he so eloquently claims for
himself, and so foolishly tries to deny to others; but I really
could not take Mr. Wentworth Huyshe's personal appearance as any
intellectual basis for an investigation of the principles which
should guide the costume of a nation.  I am not denying the force,
or even the popularity, of the "'Eave arf a brick" school of
criticism, but I acknowledge it does not interest me.  The gamin in
the gutter may be a necessity, but the gamin in discussion is a
nuisance.  So I will proceed at once to the real point at issue,
the value of the late eighteenth-century costume over that worn in
the second quarter of the seventeenth:  the relative merits, that
is, of the principles contained in each.  Now, as regards the
eighteenth-century costume, Mr. Wentworth Huyshe acknowledges that
he has had no practical experience of it at all; in fact he makes a
pathetic appeal to his friends to corroborate him in his assertion,
which I do not question for a moment, that he has never been
"guilty of the eccentricity" of wearing himself the dress which he
proposes for general adoption by others.  There is something so
naive and so amusing about this last passage in Mr. Huyshe's letter
that I am really in doubt whether I am not doing him a wrong in
regarding him as having any serious, or sincere, views on the
question of a possible reform in dress; still, as irrespective of
any attitude of Mr. Huyshe's in the matter, the subject is in
itself an interesting one, I think it is worth continuing,
particularly as I have myself worn this late eighteenth-century
dress many times, both in public and in private, and so may claim
to have a very positive right to speak on its comfort and
suitability.  The particular form of the dress I wore was very
similar to that given in Mr. Godwin's handbook, from a print of
Northcote's, and had a certain elegance and grace about it which
was very charming; still, I gave it up for these reasons:- After a
further consideration of the laws of dress I saw that a doublet is
a far simpler and easier garment than a coat and waistcoat, and, if
buttoned from the shoulder, far warmer also, and that tails have no
place in costume, except on some Darwinian theory of heredity; from
absolute experience in the matter I found that the excessive
tightness of knee-breeches is not really comfortable if one wears
them constantly; and, in fact, I satisfied myself that the dress is
not one founded on any real principles.  The broad-brimmed hat and
loose cloak, which, as my object was not, of course, historical
accuracy but modern ease, I had always worn with the costume in
question, I have still retained, and find them most comfortable.

Well, although Mr. Huyshe has no real experience of the dress he
proposes, he gives us a drawing of it, which he labels, somewhat
prematurely, "An ideal dress."  An ideal dress of course it is not;
"passably picturesque," he says I may possibly think it; well,
passably picturesque it may be, but not beautiful, certainly,
simply because it is not founded on right principles, or, indeed,
on any principles at all.  Picturesqueness one may get in a variety
of ways; ugly things that are strange, or unfamiliar to us, for
instance, may be picturesque, such as a late sixteenth-century
costume, or a Georgian house.  Ruins, again, may be picturesque,
but beautiful they never can be, because their lines are
meaningless.  Beauty, in fact, is to be got only from the
perfection of principles; and in "the ideal dress" of Mr. Huyshe
there are no ideas or principles at all, much less the perfection
of either.  Let us examine it, and see its faults; they are obvious
to any one who desires more than a "Fancy-dress ball" basis for
costume.  To begin with, the hat and boots are all wrong.  Whatever
one wears on the extremities, such as the feet and head, should,
for the sake of comfort, be made of a soft material, and for the
sake of freedom should take its shape from the way one chooses to
wear it, and not from any stiff, stereotyped design of hat or boot
maker.  In a hat made on right principles one should be able to
turn the brim up or down according as the day is dark or fair, dry
or wet; but the hat brim of Mr. Huyshe's drawing is perfectly
stiff, and does not give much protection to the face, or the
possibility of any at all to the back of the head or the ears, in
case of a cold east wind; whereas the bycocket, a hat made in
accordance with the right laws, can be turned down behind and at
the sides, and so give the same warmth as a hood.  The crown,
again, of Mr. Huyshe's hat is far too high; a high crown diminishes
the stature of a small person, and in the case of any one who is
tall is a great inconvenience when one is getting in and out of
hansoms and railway carriages, or passing under a street awning:
in no case is it of any value whatsoever, and being useless it is
of course against the principles of dress.

As regards the boots, they are not quite so ugly or so
uncomfortable as the hat; still they are evidently made of stiff
leather, as otherwise they would fall down to the ankle, whereas
the boot should be made of soft leather always, and if worn high at
all must be either laced up the front or carried well over the
knee:  in the latter case one combines perfect freedom for walking
together with perfect protection against rain, neither of which
advantages a short stiff boot will ever give one, and when one is
resting in the house the long soft boot can be turned down as the
boot of 1640 was.  Then there is the overcoat:  now, what are the
right principles of an overcoat?  To begin with, it should be
capable of being easily put on or off, and worn over any kind of
dress; consequently it should never have narrow sleeves, such as
are shown in Mr. Huyshe's drawing.  If an opening or slit for the
arm is required it should be made quite wide, and may be protected
by a flap, as in that excellent overall the modern Inverness cape;
secondly, it should not be too tight, as otherwise all freedom of
walking is impeded.  If the young gentleman in the drawing buttons
his overcoat he may succeed in being statuesque, though that I
doubt very strongly, but he will never succeed in being swift; his
super-totus is made for him on no principle whatsoever; a super-
totus, or overall, should be capable of being worn long or short,
quite loose or moderately tight, just as the wearer wishes; he
should be able to have one arm free and one arm covered or both
arms free or both arms covered, just as he chooses for his
convenience in riding, walking, or driving; an overall again should
never be heavy, and should always be warm:  lastly, it should be
capable of being easily carried if one wants to take it off; in
fact, its principles are those of freedom and comfort, and a cloak
realizes them all, just as much as an overcoat of the pattern
suggested by Mr. Huyshe violates them.

The knee-breeches are of course far too tight; any one who has worn
them for any length of time--any one, in fact, whose views on the
subject are not purely theoretical--will agree with me there; like
everything else in the dress, they are a great mistake.  The
substitution of the jacket for the coat and waistcoat of the period
is a step in the right direction, which I am glad to see; it is,
however, far too tight over the hips for any possible comfort.
Whenever a jacket or doublet comes below the waist it should be
slit at each side.  In the seventeenth century the skirt of the
jacket was sometimes laced on by points and tags, so that it could
be removed at will, sometimes it was merely left open at the sides:
in each case it exemplified what are always the true principles of
dress, I mean freedom and adaptability to circumstances.

Finally, as regards drawings of this kind, I would point out that
there is absolutely no limit at all to the amount of "passably
picturesque" costumes which can be either revived or invented for
us; but that unless a costume is founded on principles and
exemplified laws, it never can be of any real value to us in the
reform of dress.  This particular drawing of Mr. Huyshe's, for
instance, proves absolutely nothing, except that our grandfathers
did not understand the proper laws of dress.  There is not a single
rule of right costume which is not violated in it, for it gives us
stiffness, tightness and discomfort instead of comfort, freedom and
ease.

Now here, on the other hand, is a dress which, being founded on
principles, can serve us as an excellent guide and model; it has
been drawn for me, most kindly, by Mr. Godwin from the Duke of
Newcastle's delightful book on horsemanship, a book which is one of
our best authorities on our best era of costume.  I do not of
course propose it necessarily for absolute imitation; that is not
the way in which one should regard it; it is not, I mean, a revival
of a dead costume, but a realization of living laws.  I give it as
an example of a particular application of principles which are
universally right.  This rationally dressed young man can turn his
hat brim down if it rains, and his loose trousers and boots down if
he is tired--that is, he can adapt his costume to circumstances;
then he enjoys perfect freedom, the arms and legs are not made
awkward or uncomfortable by the excessive tightness of narrow
sleeves and knee-breeches, and the hips are left quite
untrammelled, always an important point; and as regards comfort,
his jacket is not too loose for warmth, nor too close for
respiration; his neck is well protected without being strangled,
and even his ostrich feathers, if any Philistine should object to
them, are not merely dandyism, but fan him very pleasantly, I am
sure, in summer, and when the weather is bad they are no doubt left
at home, and his cloak taken out.  THE VALUE OF THE DRESS IS SIMPLY
THAT EVERY SEPARATE ARTICLE OF IT EXPRESSES A LAW.  My young man is
consequently apparelled with ideas, while Mr. Huyshe's young man is
stiffened with facts; the latter teaches one nothing; from the
former one learns everything.  I need hardly say that this dress is
good, not because it is seventeenth century, but because it is
constructed on the true principles of costume, just as a square
lintel or pointed arch is good, not because one may be Greek and
the other Gothic, but because each of them is the best method of
spanning a certain-sized opening, or resisting a certain weight.
The fact, however, that this dress was generally worn in England
two centuries and a half ago shows at least this, that the right
laws of dress have been understood and realized in our country, and
so in our country may be realized and understood again.  As regards
the absolute beauty of this dress and its meaning, I should like to
say a few words more.  Mr. Wentworth Huyshe solemnly announces that
"he and those who think with him" cannot permit this question of
beauty to be imported into the question of dress; that he and those
who think with him take "practical views on the subject," and so
on.  Well, I will not enter here into a discussion as to how far
any one who does not take beauty and the value of beauty into
account can claim to be practical at all.  The word practical is
nearly always the last refuge of the uncivilized.  Of all misused
words it is the most evilly treated.  But what I want to point out
is that beauty is essentially organic; that is, it comes, not from
without, but from within, not from any added prettiness, but from
the perfection of its own being; and that consequently, as the body
is beautiful, so all apparel that rightly clothes it must be
beautiful also in its construction and in its lines.

I have no more desire to define ugliness than I have daring to
define beauty; but still I would like to remind those who mock at
beauty as being an unpractical thing of this fact, that an ugly
thing is merely a thing that is badly made, or a thing that does
not serve it purpose; that ugliness is want of fitness; that
ugliness is failure; that ugliness is uselessness, such as ornament
in the wrong place, while beauty, as some one finely said, is the
purgation of all superfluities.  There is a divine economy about
beauty; it gives us just what is needful and no more, whereas
ugliness is always extravagant; ugliness is a spendthrift and
wastes its material; in fine, ugliness--and I would commend this
remark to Mr. Wentworth Huyshe--ugliness, as much in costume as in
anything else, is always the sign that somebody has been
unpractical.  So the costume of the future in England, if it is
founded on the true laws of freedom, comfort, and adaptability to
circumstances, cannot fail to be most beautiful also, because
beauty is the sign always of the rightness of principles, the
mystical seal that is set upon what is perfect, and upon what is
perfect only.

As for your other correspondent, the first principle of dress that
all garments should be hung from the shoulders and not from the
waist seems to me to be generally approved of, although an "Old
Sailor" declares that no sailors or athletes ever suspend their
clothes from the shoulders, but always from the hips.  My own
recollection of the river and running ground at Oxford--those two
homes of Hellenism in our little Gothic town--is that the best
runners and rowers (and my own college turned out many) wore always
a tight jersey, with short drawers attached to it, the whole
costume being woven in one piece.  As for sailors, it is true, I
admit, and the bad custom seems to involve that constant "hitching
up" of the lower garments which, however popular in transpontine
dramas, cannot, I think, but be considered an extremely awkward
habit; and as all awkwardness comes from discomfort of some kind, I
trust that this point in our sailor's dress will be looked to in
the coming reform of our navy, for, in spite of all protests, I
hope we are about to reform everything, from torpedoes to top-hats,
and from crinolettes to cruises.

Then as regards clogs, my suggestion of them seems to have aroused
a great deal of terror.  Fashion in her high-heeled boots has
screamed, and the dreadful word "anachronism" has been used.  Now,
whatever is useful cannot be an anachronism.  Such a word is
applicable only to the revival of some folly; and, besides, in the
England of our own day clogs are still worn in many of our
manufacturing towns, such as Oldham.  I fear that in Oldham they
may not be dreams of beauty; in Oldham the art of inlaying them
with ivory and with pearl may possibly be unknown; yet in Oldham
they serve their purpose.  Nor is it so long since they were worn
by the upper classes of this country generally.  Only a few days
ago I had the pleasure of talking to a lady who remembered with
affectionate regret the clogs of her girlhood; they were, according
to her, not too high nor too heavy, and were provided, besides,
with some kind of spring in the sole so as to make them the more
supple for the foot in walking.  Personally, I object to all
additional height being given to a boot or shoe; it is really
against the proper principles of dress, although, if any such
height is to be given it should be by means of two props; not one;
but what I should prefer to see is some adaptation of the divided
skirt or long and moderately loose knickerbockers.  If, however,
the divided skirt is to be of any positive value, it must give up
all idea of "being identical in appearance with an ordinary skirt";
it must diminish the moderate width of each of its divisions, and
sacrifice its foolish frills and flounces; the moment it imitates a
dress it is lost; but let it visibly announce itself as what it
actually is, and it will go far towards solving a real difficulty.
I feel sure that there will be found many graceful and charming
girls ready to adopt a costume founded on these principles, in
spite of Mr. Wentworth Huyshe's terrible threat that he will not
propose to them as long as they wear it, for all charges of a want
of womanly character in these forms of dress are really
meaningless; every right article of apparel belongs equally to both
sexes, and there is absolutely no such thing as a definitely
feminine garment.  One word of warning I should like to be allowed
to give:  The over-tunic should be made full and moderately loose;
it may, if desired, be shaped more or less to the figure, but in no
case should it be confined at the waist by any straight band or
belt; on the contrary, it should fall from the shoulder to the
knee, or below it, in fine curves and vertical lines, giving more
freedom and consequently more grace.  Few garments are so
absolutely unbecoming as a belted tunic that reaches to the knees,
a fact which I wish some of our Rosalinds would consider when they
don doublet and hose; indeed, to the disregard of this artistic
principle is due the ugliness, the want of proportion, in the
Bloomer costume, a costume which in other respects is sensible.



COSTUME



Are we not all weary of him, that venerable impostor fresh from the
steps of the Piazza di Spagna, who, in the leisure moments that he
can spare from his customary organ, makes the round of the studios
and is waited for in Holland Park?  Do we not all recognize him,
when, with the gay insouciance of his nation, he reappears on the
walls of our summer exhibitions as everything that he is not, and
as nothing that he is, glaring at us here as a patriarch of Canaan,
here beaming as a brigand from the Abruzzi?  Popular is he, this
poor peripatetic professor of posing, with those whose joy it is to
paint the posthumous portrait of the last philanthropist who in his
lifetime had neglected to be photographed,--yet he is the sign of
the decadence, the symbol of decay.

For all costumes are caricatures.  The basis of Art is not the
Fancy Ball.  Where there is loveliness of dress, there is no
dressing up.  And so, were our national attire delightful in
colour, and in construction simple and sincere; were dress the
expression of the loveliness that it shields and of the swiftness
and motion that it does not impede; did its lines break from the
shoulder instead of bulging from the waist; did the inverted
wineglass cease to be the ideal of form; were these things brought
about, as brought about they will be, then would painting be no
longer an artificial reaction against the ugliness of life, but
become, as it should be, the natural expression of life's beauty.
Nor would painting merely, but all the other arts also, be the
gainers by a change such as that which I propose; the gainers, I
mean, through the increased atmosphere of Beauty by which the
artists would be surrounded and in which they would grow up.  For
Art is not to be taught in Academies.  It is what one looks at, not
what one listens to, that makes the artist.  The real schools
should be the streets.  There is not, for instance, a single
delicate line, or delightful proportion, in the dress of the
Greeks, which is not echoed exquisitely in their architecture.  A
nation arrayed in stove-pipe hats and dress-improvers might have
built the Pantechnichon possibly, but the Parthenon never.  And
finally, there is this to be said:  Art, it is true, can never have
any other claim but her own perfection, and it may be that the
artist, desiring merely to contemplate and to create, is wise in
not busying himself about change in others:  yet wisdom is not
always the best; there are times when she sinks to the level of
common-sense; and from the passionate folly of those--and there are
many--who desire that Beauty shall be confined no longer to the
bric-a-brac of the collector and the dust of the museum, but shall
be, as it should be, the natural and national inheritance of all,--
from this noble unwisdom, I say, who knows what new loveliness
shall be given to life, and, under these more exquisite conditions,
what perfect artist born?  Le milieu se renouvelant, l'art se
renouvelle.



THE AMERICAN INVASION



A terrible danger is hanging over the Americans in London.  Their
future and their reputation this season depend entirely on the
success of Buffalo Bill and Mrs. Brown-Potter.  The former is
certain to draw; for English people are far more interested in
American barbarism than they are in American civilization.  When
they sight Sandy Hook they look to their rifles and ammunition;
and, after dining once at Delmonico's, start off for Colorado or
California, for Montana or the Yellow Stone Park.  Rocky Mountains
charm them more than riotous millionaires; they have been known to
prefer buffaloes to Boston.  Why should they not?  The cities of
America are inexpressibly tedious.  The Bostonians take their
learning too sadly; culture with them is an accomplishment rather
than an atmosphere; their "Hub," as they call it, is the paradise
of prigs.  Chicago is a sort of monster-shop, full of bustle and
bores.  Political life at Washington is like political life in a
suburban vestry.  Baltimore is amusing for a week, but Philadelphia
is dreadfully provincial; and though one can dine in New York one
could not dwell there.  Better the Far West with its grizzly bears
and its untamed cowboys, its free open-air life and its free open-
air manners, its boundless prairie and its boundless mendacity!
This is what Buffalo Bill is going to bring to London; and we have
no doubt that London will fully appreciate his show.

With regard to Mrs. Brown-Potter, as acting is no longer considered
absolutely essential for success on the English stage, there is
really no reason why the pretty bright-eyed lady who charmed us all
last June by her merry laugh and her nonchalant ways, should not--
to borrow an expression from her native language--make a big boom
and paint the town red.  We sincerely hope she will; for, on the
whole, the American invasion has done English society a great deal
of good.  American women are bright, clever, and wonderfully
cosmopolitan.  Their patriotic feelings are limited to an
admiration for Niagara and a regret for the Elevated Railway; and,
unlike the men, they never bore us with Bunkers Hill.  They take
their dresses from Paris and their manners from Piccadilly, and
wear both charmingly.  They have a quaint pertness, a delightful
conceit, a native self-assertion.  They insist on being paid
compliments and have almost succeeded in making Englishmen
eloquent.  For our aristocracy they have an ardent admiration; they
adore titles and are a permanent blow to Republican principles.  In
the art of amusing men they are adepts, both by nature and
education, and can actually tell a story without forgetting the
point--an accomplishment that is extremely rare among the women of
other countries.  It is true that they lack repose and that their
voices are somewhat harsh and strident when they land first at
Liverpool; but after a time one gets to love those pretty
whirlwinds in petticoats that sweep so recklessly through society
and are so agitating to all duchesses who have daughters.  There is
something fascinating in their funny, exaggerated gestures and
their petulant way of tossing the head.  Their eyes have no magic
nor mystery in them, but they challenge us for combat; and when we
engage we are always worsted.  Their lips seem made for laughter
and yet they never grimace.  As for their voices they soon get them
into tune.  Some of them have been known to acquire a fashionable
drawl in two seasons; and after they have been presented to Royalty
they all roll their R's as vigorously as a young equerry or an old
lady-in-waiting.  Still, they never really lose their accent; it
keeps peeping out here and there, and when they chatter together
they are like a bevy of peacocks.  Nothing is more amusing than to
watch two American girls greeting each other in a drawing-room or
in the Row.  They are like children with their shrill staccato
cries of wonder, their odd little exclamations.  Their conversation
sounds like a series of exploding crackers; they are exquisitely
incoherent and use a sort of primitive, emotional language.  After
five minutes they are left beautifully breathless and look at each
other half in amusement and half in affection.  If a stolid young
Englishman is fortunate enough to be introduced to them he is
amazed at their extraordinary vivacity, their electric quickness of
repartee, their inexhaustible store of curious catchwords.  He
never really understands them, for their thoughts flutter about
with the sweet irresponsibility of butterflies; but he is pleased
and amused and feels as if he were in an aviary.  On the whole,
American girls have a wonderful charm and, perhaps, the chief
secret of their charm is that they never talk seriously except
about amusements.  They have, however, one grave fault--their
mothers.  Dreary as were those old Pilgrim Fathers who left our
shores more than two centuries ago to found a New England beyond
the seas, the Pilgrim Mothers who have returned to us in the
nineteenth century are drearier still.

Here and there, of course, there are exceptions, but as a class
they are either dull, dowdy or dyspeptic.  It is only fair to the
rising generation of America to state that they are not to blame
for this.  Indeed, they spare no pains at all to bring up their
parents properly and to give them a suitable, if somewhat late,
education.  From its earliest years every American child spends
most of its time in correcting the faults of its father and mother;
and no one who has had the opportunity of watching an American
family on the deck of an Atlantic steamer, or in the refined
seclusion of a New York boarding-house, can fail to have been
struck by this characteristic of their civilization.  In America
the young are always ready to give to those who are older than
themselves the full benefits of their inexperience.  A boy of only
eleven or twelve years of age will firmly but kindly point out to
his father his defects of manner or temper; will never weary of
warning him against extravagance, idleness, late hours,
unpunctuality, and the other temptations to which the aged are so
particularly exposed; and sometimes, should he fancy that he is
monopolizing too much of the conversation at dinner, will remind
him, across the table, of the new child's adage, "Parents should be
seen, not heard."  Nor does any mistaken idea of kindness prevent
the little American girl from censuring her mother whenever it is
necessary.  Often, indeed, feeling that a rebuke conveyed in the
presence of others is more truly efficacious than one merely
whispered in the quiet of the nursery, she will call the attention
of perfect strangers to her mother's general untidiness, her want
of intellectual Boston conversation, immoderate love of iced water
and green corn, stinginess in the matter of candy, ignorance of the
usages of the best Baltimore Society, bodily ailments, and the
like.  In fact, it may be truly said that no American child is ever
blind to the deficiencies of its parents, no matter how much it may
love them.

Yet, somehow, this educational system has not been so successful as
it deserved.  In many cases, no doubt, the material with which the
children had to deal was crude and incapable of real development;
but the fact remains that the American mother is a tedious person.
The American father is better, for he is never seen in London.  He
passes his life entirely in Wall Street and communicates with his
family once a month by means of a telegram in cipher.  The mother,
however, is always with us, and, lacking the quick imitative
faculty of the younger generation, remains uninteresting and
provincial to the last.  In spite of her, however, the American
girl is always welcome.  She brightens our dull dinner parties for
us and makes life go pleasantly by for a season.  In the race for
coronets she often carries off the prize; but, once she has gained
the victory, she is generous and forgives her English rivals
everything, even their beauty.

Warned by the example of her mother that American women do not grow
old gracefully, she tries not to grow old at all and often
succeeds.  She has exquisite feet and hands, is always bien
chaussee et bien gantee and can talk brilliantly upon any subject,
provided that she knows nothing about it.

Her sense of humour keeps her from the tragedy of a grande passion,
and, as there is neither romance nor humility in her love, she
makes an excellent wife.  What her ultimate influence on English
life will be it is difficult to estimate at present; but there can
be no doubt that, of all the factors that have contributed to the
social revolution of London, there are few more important, and none
more delightful, than the American Invasion.



SERMONS IN STONES AT BLOOMSBURY
THE NEW SCULPTURE ROOM AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM



Through the exertions of Sir Charles Newton, to whom every student
of classic art should be grateful, some of the wonderful treasures
so long immured in the grimy vaults of the British Museum have at
last been brought to light, and the new Sculpture Room now opened
to the public will amply repay the trouble of a visit, even from
those to whom art is a stumbling-block and a rock of offence.  For
setting aside the mere beauty of form, outline and mass, the grace
and loveliness of design and the delicacy of technical treatment,
here we have shown to us what the Greeks and Romans thought about
death; and the philosopher, the preacher, the practical man of the
world, and even the Philistine himself, cannot fail to be touched
by these "sermons in stones," with their deep significance, their
fertile suggestion, their plain humanity.  Common tombstones they
are, most of them, the work not of famous artists but of simple
handicraftsmen, only they were wrought in days when every
handicraft was an art.  The finest specimens, from the purely
artistic point of view, are undoubtedly the two stelai found at
Athens.  They are both the tombstones of young Greek athletes.  In
one the athlete is represented handing his strigil to his slave, in
the other the athlete stands alone, strigil in hand.  They do not
belong to the greatest period of Greek art, they have not the grand
style of the Phidian age, but they are beautiful for all that, and
it is impossible not to be fascinated by their exquisite grace and
by the treatment which is so simple in its means, so subtle in its
effect.  All the tombstones, however, are full of interest.  Here
is one of two ladies of Smyrna who were so remarkable in their day
that the city voted them honorary crowns; here is a Greek doctor
examining a little boy who is suffering from indigestion; here is
the memorial of Xanthippus who, probably, was a martyr to gout, as
he is holding in his hand the model of a foot, intended, no doubt,
as a votive offering to some god.  A lovely stele from Rhodes gives
us a family group.  The husband is on horseback and is bidding
farewell to his wife, who seems as if she would follow him but is
being held back by a little child.  The pathos of parting from
those we love is the central motive of Greek funeral art.  It is
repeated in every possible form, and each mute marble stone seems
to murmur [Greek text].  Roman art is different.  It introduces
vigorous and realistic portraiture and deals with pure family life
far more frequently than Greek art does.  They are very ugly, those
stern-looking Roman men and women whose portraits are exhibited on
their tombs, but they seem to have been loved and respected by
their children and their servants.  Here is the monument of
Aphrodisius and Atilia, a Roman gentleman and his wife, who died in
Britain many centuries ago, and whose tombstone was found in the
Thames; and close by it stands a stele from Rome with the busts of
an old married couple who are certainly marvellously ill-favoured.
The contrast between the abstract Greek treatment of the idea of
death and the Roman concrete realization of the individuals who
have died is extremely curious.

Besides the tombstones, the new Sculpture Room contains some most
fascinating examples of Roman decorative art under the Emperors.
The most wonderful of all, and this alone is worth a trip to
Bloomsbury, is a bas-relief representing a marriage scene, Juno
Pronuba is joining the hands of a handsome young noble and a very
stately lady.  There is all the grace of Perugino in this marble,
all the grace of Raphael even.  The date of it is uncertain, but
the particular cut of the bridegroom's beard seems to point to the
time of the Emperor Hadrian.  It is clearly the work of Greek
artists and is one of the most beautiful bas-reliefs in the whole
Museum.  There is something in it which reminds one of the music
and the sweetness of Propertian verse.  Then we have delightful
friezes of children.  One representing children playing on musical
instruments might have suggested much of the plastic art of
Florence.  Indeed, as we view these marbles it is not difficult to
see whence the Renaissance sprang and to what we owe the various
forms of Renaissance art.  The frieze of the Muses, each of whom
wears in her hair a feather plucked from the wings of the
vanquished sirens, is extremely fine; there is a lovely little bas-
relief of two cupids racing in chariots; and the frieze of
recumbent Amazons has some splendid qualities of design.  A frieze
of children playing with the armour of the god Mars should also be
mentioned.  It is full of fancy and delicate humour.

 We hope that some more of the hidden treasures will shortly be
catalogued and shown.  In the vaults at present there is a very
remarkable bas-relief of the marriage of Cupid and Psyche, and
another representing the professional mourners weeping over the
body of the dead.  The fine cast of the Lion of Chaeronea should
also be brought up, and so should the stele with the marvellous
portrait of the Roman slave.  Economy is an excellent public
virtue, but the parsimony that allows valuable works of art to
remain in the grim and gloom of a damp cellar is little short of a
detestable public vice.



L'ENVOI



Amongst the many young men in England who are seeking along with me
to continue and to perfect the English Renaissance--jeunes
guerriers du drapeau romantique, as Gautier would have called us--
there is none whose love of art is more flawless and fervent, whose
artistic sense of beauty is more subtle and more delicate--none,
indeed, who is dearer to myself--than the young poet whose verses I
have brought with me to America; verses full of sweet sadness, and
yet full of joy; for the most joyous poet is not he who sows the
desolate highways of this world with the barren seed of laughter,
but he who makes his sorrow most musical, this indeed being the
meaning of joy in art--that incommunicable element of artistic
delight which, in poetry, for instance, comes from what Keats
called "sensuous life of verse," the element of song in the
singing, made so pleasurable to us by that wonder of motion which
often has its origin in mere musical impulse, and in painting is to
be sought for, from the subject never, but from the pictorial charm
only--the scheme and symphony of the colour, the satisfying beauty
of the design:  so that the ultimate expression of our artistic
movement in painting has been, not in the spiritual vision of the
Pre-Raphaelites, for all their marvel of Greek legend and their
mystery of Italian song, but in the work of such men as Whistler
and Albert Moore, who have raised design and colour to the ideal
level of poetry and music.  For the quality of their exquisite
painting comes from the mere inventive and creative handling of
line and colour, from a certain form and choice of beautiful
workmanship, which, rejecting all literary reminiscence and all
metaphysical idea, is in itself entirely satisfying to the
aesthetic sense--is, as the Greeks would say, an end in itself; the
effect of their work being like the effect given to us by music;
for music is the art in which form and matter are always one--the
art whose subject cannot be separated from the method of its
expression; the art which most completely realizes for us the
artistic ideal, and is the condition to which all the other arts
are constantly aspiring.

Now, this increased sense of the absolutely satisfying value of
beautiful workmanship, this recognition of the primary importance
of the sensuous element in art, this love of art for art's sake, is
the point in which we of the younger school have made a departure
from the teaching of Mr. Ruskin,--a departure definite and
different and decisive.

Master indeed of the knowledge of all noble living and of the
wisdom of all spiritual things will he be to us ever, seeing that
it was he who by the magic of his presence and the music of his
lips taught us at Oxford that enthusiasm for beauty which is the
secret of Hellenism, and that desire for creation which is the
secret of life, and filled some of us, at least, with the lofty and
passionate ambition to go forth into far and fair lands with some
message for the nations and some mission for the world, and yet in
his art criticism, his estimate of the joyous element of art, his
whole method of approaching art, we are no longer with him; for the
keystone to his aesthetic system is ethical always.  He would judge
of a picture by the amount of noble moral ideas it expresses; but
to us the channels by which all noble work in painting can touch,
and does touch, the soul are not those of truths of life or
metaphysical truths.  To him perfection of workmanship seems but
the symbol of pride, and incompleteness of technical resource the
image of an imagination too limitless to find within the limits of
form its complete expression, or of love too simple not to stammer
in its tale.  But to us the rule of art is not the rule of morals.
In an ethical system, indeed, of any gentle mercy good intentions
will, one is fain to fancy, have their recognition; but of those
that would enter the serene House of Beauty the question that we
ask is not what they had ever meant to do, but what they have done.
Their pathetic intentions are of no value to us, but their realized
creations only.  Pour moi je prefere les poetes qui font des vers,
les medecins qui sachent guerir, les peintres qui sanchent peindre.

Nor, in looking at a work of art, should we be dreaming of what it
symbolises, but rather loving it for what it is.  Indeed, the
transcendental spirit is alien to the spirit of art.  The
metaphysical mind of Asia may create for itself the monstrous and
many-breasted idol, but to the Greek, pure artist, that work is
most instinct with spiritual life which conforms most closely to
the perfect facts of physical life also.  Nor, in its primary
aspect, has a painting, for instance, any more spiritual message or
meaning for us than a blue tile from the wall of Damascus, or a
Hitzen vase.  It is a beautifully coloured surface, nothing more,
and affects us by no suggestion stolen from philosophy, no pathos
pilfered from literature, no feeling filched from a poet, but by
its own incommunicable artistic essence--by that selection of truth
which we call style, and that relation of values which is the
draughtsmanship of painting, by the whole quality of the
workmanship, the arabesque of the design, the splendour of the
colour, for these things are enough to stir the most divine and
remote of the chords which make music in our soul, and colour,
indeed, is of itself a mystical presence on things, and tone a kind
of sentiment . . . all these poems aim, as I said, at producing a
purely artistic effect, and have the rare and exquisite quality
that belongs to work of that kind; and I feel that the entire
subordination in our aesthetic movement of all merely emotional and
intellectual motives to the vital informing poetic principle is the
surest sign of our strength.

But it is not enough that a work of art should conform to the
aesthetic demands of the age:  there should be also about it, if it
is to give us any permanent delight, the impress of a distinct
individuality.  Whatever work we have in the nineteenth century
must rest on the two poles of personality and perfection.  And so
in this little volume, by separating the earlier and more simple
work from the work that is later and stronger and possesses
increased technical power and more artistic vision, one might weave
these disconnected poems, these stray and scattered threads, into
one fiery-coloured strand of life, noting first a boy's mere
gladness of being young, with all its simple joy in field and
flower, in sunlight and in song, and then the bitterness of sudden
sorrow at the ending by Death of one of the brief and beautiful
friendships of one's youth, with all those unanswered lodgings and
questionings unsatisfied by which we vex, so uselessly, the marble
face of death; the artistic contrast between the discontented
incompleteness of the spirit and the complete perfection of the
style that expresses it forming the chief element of the aesthetic
charm of these particular poems;--and then the birth of Love, and
all the wonder and the fear and the perilous delight of one on
whose boyish brows the little wings of love have beaten for the
first time; and the love-songs, so dainty and delicate, little
swallow-flights of music, and full of such fragrance and freedom
that they might all be sung in the open air and across moving
water; and then autumn, coming with its choirless woods and odorous
decay and ruined loveliness, Love lying dead; and the sense of the
mere pity of it.

One might stop there, for from a young poet one should ask for no
deeper chords of life than those that love and friendship make
eternal for us; and the best poems in the volume belong clearly to
a later time, a time when these real experiences become absorbed
and gathered up into a form which seems from such real experiences
to be the most alien and the most remote; when the simple
expression of joy or sorrow suffices no longer, and lives rather in
the stateliness of the cadenced metre, in the music and colour of
the linked words, than in any direct utterance; lives, one might
say, in the perfection of the form more than in the pathos of the
feeling.  And yet, after the broken music of love and the burial of
love in the autumn woods, we can trace that wandering among strange
people, and in lands unknown to us, by which we try so pathetically
to heal the hurts of the life we know, and that pure and passionate
devotion to Art which one gets when the harsh reality of life has
too suddenly wounded one, and is with discontent or sorrow marring
one's youth, just as often, I think, as one gets it from any
natural joy of living; and that curious intensity of vision by
which, in moments of overmastering sadness and despair
ungovernable, artistic things will live in one's memory with a
vivid realism caught from the life which they help one to forget--
an old grey tomb in Flanders with a strange legend on it, making
one think how, perhaps, passion does live on after death; a
necklace of blue and amber beads and a broken mirror found in a
girl's grave at Rome, a marble image of a boy habited like Eros,
and with the pathetic tradition of a great king's sorrow lingering
about it like a purple shadow,--over all these the tired spirit
broods with that calm and certain joy that one gets when one has
found something that the ages never dull and the world cannot harm;
and with it comes that desire of Greek things which is often an
artistic method of expressing one's desire for perfection; and that
longing for the old dead days which is so modern, so incomplete, so
touching, being, in a way, the inverted torch of Hope, which burns
the hand it should guide; and for many things a little sadness, and
for all things a great love; and lastly, in the pinewood by the
sea, once more the quick and vital pulse of joyous youth leaping
and laughing in every line, the frank and fearless freedom of wave
and wind waking into fire life's burnt-out ashes and into song the
silent lips of pain,--how clearly one seems to see it all, the long
colonnade of pines with sea and sky peeping in here and there like
a flitting of silver; the open place in the green, deep heart of
the wood with the little moss-grown altar to the old Italian god in
it; and the flowers all about, cyclamen in the shadowy places, and
the stars of the white narcissus lying like snow-flakes over the
grass, where the quick, bright-eyed lizard starts by the stone, and
the snake lies coiled lazily in the sun on the hot sand, and
overhead the gossamer floats from the branches like thin, tremulous
threads of gold,--the scene is so perfect for its motive, for
surely here, if anywhere, the real gladness of life might be
revealed to one's youth--the gladness that comes, not from the
rejection, but from the absorption, of all passion, and is like
that serene calm that dwells in the faces of the Greek statues, and
which despair and sorrow cannot touch, but intensify only.

In some such way as this we could gather up these strewn and
scattered petals of song into one perfect rose of life, and yet,
perhaps, in so doing, we might be missing the true quality of the
poems; one's real life is so often the life that one does not lead;
and beautiful poems, like threads of beautiful silks, may be woven
into many patterns and to suit many designs, all wonderful and all
different:  and romantic poetry, too, is essentially the poetry of
impressions, being like that latest school of painting, the school
of Whistler and Albert Moore, in its choice of situation as opposed
to subject; in its dealing with the exceptions rather than with the
types of life; in its brief intensity; in what one might call its
fiery-coloured momentariness, it being indeed the momentary
situations of life, the momentary aspects of nature, which poetry
and painting new seek to render for us.  Sincerity and constancy
will the artist, indeed, have always; but sincerity in art is
merely that plastic perfection of execution without which a poem or
a painting, however noble its sentiment or human its origin, is but
wasted and unreal work, and the constancy of the artist cannot be
to any definite rule or system of living, but to that principle of
beauty only through which the inconstant shadows of his life are in
their most fleeting moment arrested and made permanent.  He will
not, for instance, in intellectual matters acquiesce in that facile
orthodoxy of our day which is so reasonable and so artistically
uninteresting, nor yet will he desire that fiery faith of the
antique time which, while it intensified, yet limited the vision;
still less will he allow the calm of his culture to be marred by
the discordant despair of doubt or the sadness of a sterile
scepticism; for the Valley Perilous, where ignorant armies clash by
night, is no resting-place meet for her to whom the gods have
assigned the clear upland, the serene height, and the sunlit air,--
rather will he be always curiously testing new forms of belief,
tinging his nature with the sentiment that still lingers about some
beautiful creeds, and searching for experience itself, and not for
the fruits of experience; when he has got its secret, he will leave
without regret much that was once very precious to him.  "I am
always insincere," says Emerson somewhere, "as knowing that there
are other moods":  "Les emotions," wrote Theophile Gautier once in
a review of Arsene Houssaye, "Les emotions, ne se ressemblent pas,
mais etre emu--voila l'important."

Now, this is the secret of the art of the modern romantic school,
and gives one the right keynote for its apprehension; but the real
quality of all work which, like Mr. Rodd's, aims, as I said, at a
purely artistic effect, cannot be described in terms of
intellectual criticism; it is too intangible for that.  One can
perhaps convey it best in terms of the other arts, and by reference
to them; and, indeed, some of these poems are as iridescent and as
exquisite as a lovely fragment of Venetian glass; others as
delicate in perfect workmanship and as single in natural motive as
an etching by Whistler is, or one of those beautiful little Greek
figures which in the olive woods round Tanagra men can still find,
with the faint gilding and the fading crimson not yet fled from
hair and lips and raiment; and many of them seem like one of
Corot's twilights just passing into music; for not merely in
visible colour, but in sentiment also--which is the colour of
poetry--may there be a kind of tone.

But I think that the best likeness to the quality of this young
poet's work I ever saw was in the landscape by the Loire.  We were
staying once, he and I, at Amboise, that little village with its
grey slate roofs and steep streets and gaunt, grim gateway, where
the quiet cottages nestle like white pigeons into the sombre clefts
of the great bastioned rock, and the stately Renaissance houses
stand silent and apart--very desolate now, but with some memory of
the old days still lingering about the delicately-twisted pillars,
and the carved doorways, with their grotesque animals, and laughing
masks, and quaint heraldic devices, all reminding one of a people
who could not think life real till they had made it fantastic.  And
above the village, and beyond the bend of the river, we used to go
in the afternoon, and sketch from one of the big barges that bring
the wine in autumn and the wood in winter down to the sea, or lie
in the long grass and make plans pour la gloire, et pour ennuyer
les Philistins, or wander along the low, sedgy banks, "matching our
reeds in sportive rivalry," as comrades used in the old Sicilian
days; and the land was an ordinary land enough, and bare, too, when
one thought of Italy, and how the oleanders were robing the
hillsides by Genoa in scarlet, and the cyclamen filling with its
purple every valley from Florence to Rome; for there was not much
real beauty, perhaps, in it, only long, white dusty roads and
straight rows of formal poplars; but, now and then, some little
breaking gleam of broken light would lend to the grey field and the
silent barn a secret and a mystery that were hardly their own,
would transfigure for one exquisite moment the peasants passing
down through the vineyard, or the shepherd watching on the hill,
would tip the willows with silver and touch the river into gold;
and the wonder of the effect, with the strange simplicity of the
material, always seemed to me to be a little like the quality of
these the verses of my friend.

THE SOUL OF MAN


THE chief advantage that would result from the establishment of Socialism
is, undoubtedly, the fact that Socialism would relieve us from that
sordid necessity of living for others which, in the present condition of
things, presses so hardly upon almost everybody.  In fact, scarcely
anyone at all escapes.

Now and then, in the course of the century, a great man of science, like
Darwin; a great poet, like Keats; a fine critical spirit, like M. Renan;
a supreme artist, like Flaubert, has been able to isolate himself, to
keep himself out of reach of the clamorous claims of others, to stand
‘under the shelter of the wall,’ as Plato puts it, and so to realise the
perfection of what was in him, to his own incomparable gain, and to the
incomparable and lasting gain of the whole world.  These, however, are
exceptions.  The majority of people spoil their lives by an unhealthy and
exaggerated altruism—are forced, indeed, so to spoil them.  They find
themselves surrounded by hideous poverty, by hideous ugliness, by hideous
starvation.  It is inevitable that they should be strongly moved by all
this.  The emotions of man are stirred more quickly than man’s
intelligence; and, as I pointed out some time ago in an article on the
function of criticism, it is much more easy to have sympathy with
suffering than it is to have sympathy with thought.  Accordingly, with
admirable, though misdirected intentions, they very seriously and very
sentimentally set themselves to the task of remedying the evils that they
see.  But their remedies do not cure the disease: they merely prolong it.
Indeed, their remedies are part of the disease.

They try to solve the problem of poverty, for instance, by keeping the
poor alive; or, in the case of a very advanced school, by amusing the
poor.

But this is not a solution: it is an aggravation of the difficulty.  The
proper aim is to try and reconstruct society on such a basis that poverty
will be impossible.  And the altruistic virtues have really prevented the
carrying out of this aim.  Just as the worst slave-owners were those who
were kind to their slaves, and so prevented the horror of the system
being realised by those who suffered from it, and understood by those who
contemplated it, so, in the present state of things in England, the
people who do most harm are the people who try to do most good; and at
last we have had the spectacle of men who have really studied the problem
and know the life—educated men who live in the East End—coming forward
and imploring the community to restrain its altruistic impulses of
charity, benevolence, and the like.  They do so on the ground that such
charity degrades and demoralises.  They are perfectly right.  Charity
creates a multitude of sins.

There is also this to be said.  It is immoral to use private property in
order to alleviate the horrible evils that result from the institution of
private property.  It is both immoral and unfair.

Under Socialism all this will, of course, be altered.  There will be no
people living in fetid dens and fetid rags, and bringing up unhealthy,
hunger-pinched children in the midst of impossible and absolutely
repulsive surroundings.  The security of society will not depend, as it
does now, on the state of the weather.  If a frost comes we shall not
have a hundred thousand men out of work, tramping about the streets in a
state of disgusting misery, or whining to their neighbours for alms, or
crowding round the doors of loathsome shelters to try and secure a hunch
of bread and a night’s unclean lodging.  Each member of the society will
share in the general prosperity and happiness of the society, and if a
frost comes no one will practically be anything the worse.

Upon the other hand, Socialism itself will be of value simply because it
will lead to Individualism.

Socialism, Communism, or whatever one chooses to call it, by converting
private property into public wealth, and substituting co-operation for
competition, will restore society to its proper condition of a thoroughly
healthy organism, and insure the material well-being of each member of
the community.  It will, in fact, give Life its proper basis and its
proper environment.  But for the full development of Life to its highest
mode of perfection, something more is needed.  What is needed is
Individualism.  If the Socialism is Authoritarian; if there are
Governments armed with economic power as they are now with political
power; if, in a word, we are to have Industrial Tyrannies, then the last
state of man will be worse than the first.  At present, in consequence of
the existence of private property, a great many people are enabled to
develop a certain very limited amount of Individualism.  They are either
under no necessity to work for their living, or are enabled to choose the
sphere of activity that is really congenial to them, and gives them
pleasure.  These are the poets, the philosophers, the men of science, the
men of culture—in a word, the real men, the men who have realised
themselves, and in whom all Humanity gains a partial realisation.  Upon
the other hand, there are a great many people who, having no private
property of their own, and being always on the brink of sheer starvation,
are compelled to do the work of beasts of burden, to do work that is
quite uncongenial to them, and to which they are forced by the
peremptory, unreasonable, degrading Tyranny of want.  These are the poor,
and amongst them there is no grace of manner, or charm of speech, or
civilisation, or culture, or refinement in pleasures, or joy of life.
From their collective force Humanity gains much in material prosperity.
But it is only the material result that it gains, and the man who is poor
is in himself absolutely of no importance.  He is merely the
infinitesimal atom of a force that, so far from regarding him, crushes
him: indeed, prefers him crushed, as in that case he is far more
obedient.

Of course, it might be said that the Individualism generated under
conditions of private property is not always, or even as a rule, of a
fine or wonderful type, and that the poor, if they have not culture and
charm, have still many virtues.  Both these statements would be quite
true.  The possession of private property is very often extremely
demoralising, and that is, of course, one of the reasons why Socialism
wants to get rid of the institution.  In fact, property is really a
nuisance.  Some years ago people went about the country saying that
property has duties.  They said it so often and so tediously that, at
last, the Church has begun to say it.  One hears it now from every
pulpit.  It is perfectly true.  Property not merely has duties, but has
so many duties that its possession to any large extent is a bore.  It
involves endless claims upon one, endless attention to business, endless
bother.  If property had simply pleasures, we could stand it; but its
duties make it unbearable.  In the interest of the rich we must get rid
of it.  The virtues of the poor may be readily admitted, and are much to
be regretted.  We are often told that the poor are grateful for charity.
Some of them are, no doubt, but the best amongst the poor are never
grateful.  They are ungrateful, discontented, disobedient, and
rebellious.  They are quite right to be so.  Charity they feel to be a
ridiculously inadequate mode of partial restitution, or a sentimental
dole, usually accompanied by some impertinent attempt on the part of the
sentimentalist to tyrannise over their private lives.  Why should they be
grateful for the crumbs that fall from the rich man’s table?  They should
be seated at the board, and are beginning to know it.  As for being
discontented, a man who would not be discontented with such surroundings
and such a low mode of life would be a perfect brute.  Disobedience, in
the eyes of anyone who has read history, is man’s original virtue.  It is
through disobedience that progress has been made, through disobedience
and through rebellion.  Sometimes the poor are praised for being thrifty.
But to recommend thrift to the poor is both grotesque and insulting.  It
is like advising a man who is starving to eat less.  For a town or
country labourer to practise thrift would be absolutely immoral.  Man
should not be ready to show that he can live like a badly-fed animal.  He
should decline to live like that, and should either steal or go on the
rates, which is considered by many to be a form of stealing.  As for
begging, it is safer to beg than to take, but it is finer to take than to
beg.  No: a poor man who is ungrateful, unthrifty, discontented, and
rebellious, is probably a real personality, and has much in him.  He is
at any rate a healthy protest.  As for the virtuous poor, one can pity
them, of course, but one cannot possibly admire them.  They have made
private terms with the enemy, and sold their birthright for very bad
pottage.  They must also be extraordinarily stupid.  I can quite
understand a man accepting laws that protect private property, and admit
of its accumulation, as long as he himself is able under those conditions
to realise some form of beautiful and intellectual life.  But it is
almost incredible to me how a man whose life is marred and made hideous
by such laws can possibly acquiesce in their continuance.

However, the explanation is not really difficult to find.  It is simply
this.  Misery and poverty are so absolutely degrading, and exercise such
a paralysing effect over the nature of men, that no class is ever really
conscious of its own suffering.  They have to be told of it by other
people, and they often entirely disbelieve them.  What is said by great
employers of labour against agitators is unquestionably true.  Agitators
are a set of interfering, meddling people, who come down to some
perfectly contented class of the community, and sow the seeds of
discontent amongst them.  That is the reason why agitators are so
absolutely necessary.  Without them, in our incomplete state, there would
be no advance towards civilisation.  Slavery was put down in America, not
in consequence of any action on the part of the slaves, or even any
express desire on their part that they should be free.  It was put down
entirely through the grossly illegal conduct of certain agitators in
Boston and elsewhere, who were not slaves themselves, nor owners of
slaves, nor had anything to do with the question really.  It was,
undoubtedly, the Abolitionists who set the torch alight, who began the
whole thing.  And it is curious to note that from the slaves themselves
they received, not merely very little assistance, but hardly any sympathy
even; and when at the close of the war the slaves found themselves free,
found themselves indeed so absolutely free that they were free to starve,
many of them bitterly regretted the new state of things.  To the thinker,
the most tragic fact in the whole of the French Revolution is not that
Marie Antoinette was killed for being a queen, but that the starved
peasant of the Vendée voluntarily went out to die for the hideous cause
of feudalism.

It is clear, then, that no Authoritarian Socialism will do.  For while
under the present system a very large number of people can lead lives of
a certain amount of freedom and expression and happiness, under an
industrial-barrack system, or a system of economic tyranny, nobody would
be able to have any such freedom at all.  It is to be regretted that a
portion of our community should be practically in slavery, but to propose
to solve the problem by enslaving the entire community is childish.
Every man must be left quite free to choose his own work.  No form of
compulsion must be exercised over him.  If there is, his work will not be
good for him, will not be good in itself, and will not be good for
others.  And by work I simply mean activity of any kind.

I hardly think that any Socialist, nowadays, would seriously propose that
an inspector should call every morning at each house to see that each
citizen rose up and did manual labour for eight hours.  Humanity has got
beyond that stage, and reserves such a form of life for the people whom,
in a very arbitrary manner, it chooses to call criminals.  But I confess
that many of the socialistic views that I have come across seem to me to
be tainted with ideas of authority, if not of actual compulsion.  Of
course, authority and compulsion are out of the question.  All
association must be quite voluntary.  It is only in voluntary
associations that man is fine.

But it may be asked how Individualism, which is now more or less
dependent on the existence of private property for its development, will
benefit by the abolition of such private property.  The answer is very
simple.  It is true that, under existing conditions, a few men who have
had private means of their own, such as Byron, Shelley, Browning, Victor
Hugo, Baudelaire, and others, have been able to realise their personality
more or less completely.  Not one of these men ever did a single day’s
work for hire.  They were relieved from poverty.  They had an immense
advantage.  The question is whether it would be for the good of
Individualism that such an advantage should be taken away.  Let us
suppose that it is taken away.  What happens then to Individualism?  How
will it benefit?

It will benefit in this way.  Under the new conditions Individualism will
be far freer, far finer, and far more intensified than it is now.  I am
not talking of the great imaginatively-realised Individualism of such
poets as I have mentioned, but of the great actual Individualism latent
and potential in mankind generally.  For the recognition of private
property has really harmed Individualism, and obscured it, by confusing a
man with what he possesses.  It has led Individualism entirely astray.
It has made gain not growth its aim.  So that man thought that the
important thing was to have, and did not know that the important thing is
to be.  The true perfection of man lies, not in what man has, but in what
man is.  Private property has crushed true Individualism, and set up an
Individualism that is false.  It has debarred one part of the community
from being individual by starving them.  It has debarred the other part
of the community from being individual by putting them on the wrong road,
and encumbering them.  Indeed, so completely has man’s personality been
absorbed by his possessions that the English law has always treated
offences against a man’s property with far more severity than offences
against his person, and property is still the test of complete
citizenship.  The industry necessary for the making money is also very
demoralising.  In a community like ours, where property confers immense
distinction, social position, honour, respect, titles, and other pleasant
things of the kind, man, being naturally ambitious, makes it his aim to
accumulate this property, and goes on wearily and tediously accumulating
it long after he has got far more than he wants, or can use, or enjoy, or
perhaps even know of.  Man will kill himself by overwork in order to
secure property, and really, considering the enormous advantages that
property brings, one is hardly surprised.  One’s regret is that society
should be constructed on such a basis that man has been forced into a
groove in which he cannot freely develop what is wonderful, and
fascinating, and delightful in him—in which, in fact, he misses the true
pleasure and joy of living.  He is also, under existing conditions, very
insecure.  An enormously wealthy merchant may be—often is—at every moment
of his life at the mercy of things that are not under his control.  If
the wind blows an extra point or so, or the weather suddenly changes, or
some trivial thing happens, his ship may go down, his speculations may go
wrong, and he finds himself a poor man, with his social position quite
gone.  Now, nothing should be able to harm a man except himself.  Nothing
should be able to rob a man at all.  What a man really has, is what is in
him.  What is outside of him should be a matter of no importance.

With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true,
beautiful, healthy Individualism.  Nobody will waste his life in
accumulating things, and the symbols for things.  One will live.  To live
is the rarest thing in the world.  Most people exist, that is all.

It is a question whether we have ever seen the full expression of a
personality, except on the imaginative plane of art.  In action, we never
have.  Cæsar, says Mommsen, was the complete and perfect man.  But how
tragically insecure was Cæsar!  Wherever there is a man who exercises
authority, there is a man who resists authority.  Cæsar was very perfect,
but his perfection travelled by too dangerous a road.  Marcus Aurelius
was the perfect man, says Renan.  Yes; the great emperor was a perfect
man.  But how intolerable were the endless claims upon him!  He staggered
under the burden of the empire.  He was conscious how inadequate one man
was to bear the weight of that Titan and too vast orb.  What I mean by a
perfect man is one who develops under perfect conditions; one who is not
wounded, or worried or maimed, or in danger.  Most personalities have
been obliged to be rebels.  Half their strength has been wasted in
friction.  Byron’s personality, for instance, was terribly wasted in its
battle with the stupidity, and hypocrisy, and Philistinism of the
English.  Such battles do not always intensify strength: they often
exaggerate weakness.  Byron was never able to give us what he might have
given us.  Shelley escaped better.  Like Byron, he got out of England as
soon as possible.  But he was not so well known.  If the English had had
any idea of what a great poet he really was, they would have fallen on
him with tooth and nail, and made his life as unbearable to him as they
possibly could.  But he was not a remarkable figure in society, and
consequently he escaped, to a certain degree.  Still, even in Shelley the
note of rebellion is sometimes too strong.  The note of the perfect
personality is not rebellion, but peace.

It will be a marvellous thing—the true personality of man—when we see it.
It will grow naturally and simply, flowerlike, or as a tree grows.  It
will not be at discord.  It will never argue or dispute.  It will not
prove things.  It will know everything.  And yet it will not busy itself
about knowledge.  It will have wisdom.  Its value will not be measured by
material things.  It will have nothing.  And yet it will have everything,
and whatever one takes from it, it will still have, so rich will it be.
It will not be always meddling with others, or asking them to be like
itself.  It will love them because they will be different.  And yet while
it will not meddle with others, it will help all, as a beautiful thing
helps us, by being what it is.  The personality of man will be very
wonderful.  It will be as wonderful as the personality of a child.

In its development it will be assisted by Christianity, if men desire
that; but if men do not desire that, it will develop none the less
surely.  For it will not worry itself about the past, nor care whether
things happened or did not happen.  Nor will it admit any laws but its
own laws; nor any authority but its own authority.  Yet it will love
those who sought to intensify it, and speak often of them.  And of these
Christ was one.

‘Know thyself’ was written over the portal of the antique world.  Over
the portal of the new world, ‘Be thyself’ shall be written.  And the
message of Christ to man was simply ‘Be thyself.’  That is the secret of
Christ.

When Jesus talks about the poor he simply means personalities, just as
when he talks about the rich he simply means people who have not
developed their personalities.  Jesus moved in a community that allowed
the accumulation of private property just as ours does, and the gospel
that he preached was not that in such a community it is an advantage for
a man to live on scanty, unwholesome food, to wear ragged, unwholesome
clothes, to sleep in horrid, unwholesome dwellings, and a disadvantage
for a man to live under healthy, pleasant, and decent conditions.  Such a
view would have been wrong there and then, and would, of course, be still
more wrong now and in England; for as man moves northward the material
necessities of life become of more vital importance, and our society is
infinitely more complex, and displays far greater extremes of luxury and
pauperism than any society of the antique world.  What Jesus meant, was
this.  He said to man, ‘You have a wonderful personality.  Develop it.
Be yourself.  Don’t imagine that your perfection lies in accumulating or
possessing external things.  Your affection is inside of you.  If only
you could realise that, you would not want to be rich.  Ordinary riches
can be stolen from a man.  Real riches cannot.  In the treasury-house of
your soul, there are infinitely precious things, that may not be taken
from you.  And so, try to so shape your life that external things will
not harm you.  And try also to get rid of personal property.  It involves
sordid preoccupation, endless industry, continual wrong.  Personal
property hinders Individualism at every step.’  It is to be noted that
Jesus never says that impoverished people are necessarily good, or
wealthy people necessarily bad.  That would not have been true.  Wealthy
people are, as a class, better than impoverished people, more moral, more
intellectual, more well-behaved.  There is only one class in the
community that thinks more about money than the rich, and that is the
poor.  The poor can think of nothing else.  That is the misery of being
poor.  What Jesus does say is that man reaches his perfection, not
through what he has, not even through what he does, but entirely through
what he is.  And so the wealthy young man who comes to Jesus is
represented as a thoroughly good citizen, who has broken none of the laws
of his state, none of the commandments of his religion.  He is quite
respectable, in the ordinary sense of that extraordinary word.  Jesus
says to him, ‘You should give up private property.  It hinders you from
realising your perfection.  It is a drag upon you.  It is a burden.  Your
personality does not need it.  It is within you, and not outside of you,
that you will find what you really are, and what you really want.’  To
his own friends he says the same thing.  He tells them to be themselves,
and not to be always worrying about other things.  What do other things
matter?  Man is complete in himself.  When they go into the world, the
world will disagree with them.  That is inevitable.  The world hates
Individualism.  But that is not to trouble them.  They are to be calm and
self-centred.  If a man takes their cloak, they are to give him their
coat, just to show that material things are of no importance.  If people
abuse them, they are not to answer back.  What does it signify?  The
things people say of a man do not alter a man.  He is what he is.  Public
opinion is of no value whatsoever.  Even if people employ actual
violence, they are not to be violent in turn.  That would be to fall to
the same low level.  After all, even in prison, a man can be quite free.
His soul can be free.  His personality can be untroubled.  He can be at
peace.  And, above all things, they are not to interfere with other
people or judge them in any way.  Personality is a very mysterious thing.
A man cannot always be estimated by what he does.  He may keep the law,
and yet be worthless.  He may break the law, and yet be fine.  He may be
bad, without ever doing anything bad.  He may commit a sin against
society, and yet realise through that sin his true perfection.

There was a woman who was taken in adultery.  We are not told the history
of her love, but that love must have been very great; for Jesus said that
her sins were forgiven her, not because she repented, but because her
love was so intense and wonderful.  Later on, a short time before his
death, as he sat at a feast, the woman came in and poured costly perfumes
on his hair.  His friends tried to interfere with her, and said that it
was an extravagance, and that the money that the perfume cost should have
been expended on charitable relief of people in want, or something of
that kind.  Jesus did not accept that view.  He pointed out that the
material needs of Man were great and very permanent, but that the
spiritual needs of Man were greater still, and that in one divine moment,
and by selecting its own mode of expression, a personality might make
itself perfect.  The world worships the woman, even now, as a saint.

Yes; there are suggestive things in Individualism.  Socialism annihilates
family life, for instance.  With the abolition of private property,
marriage in its present form must disappear.  This is part of the
programme.  Individualism accepts this and makes it fine.  It converts
the abolition of legal restraint into a form of freedom that will help
the full development of personality, and make the love of man and woman
more wonderful, more beautiful, and more ennobling.  Jesus knew this.  He
rejected the claims of family life, although they existed in his day and
community in a very marked form.  ‘Who is my mother?  Who are my
brothers?’ he said, when he was told that they wished to speak to him.
When one of his followers asked leave to go and bury his father, ‘Let the
dead bury the dead,’ was his terrible answer.  He would allow no claim
whatsoever to be made on personality.

And so he who would lead a Christlike life is he who is perfectly and
absolutely himself.  He may be a great poet, or a great man of science;
or a young student at a University, or one who watches sheep upon a moor;
or a maker of dramas, like Shakespeare, or a thinker about God, like
Spinoza; or a child who plays in a garden, or a fisherman who throws his
net into the sea.  It does not matter what he is, as long as he realises
the perfection of the soul that is within him.  All imitation in morals
and in life is wrong.  Through the streets of Jerusalem at the present
day crawls one who is mad and carries a wooden cross on his shoulders.
He is a symbol of the lives that are marred by imitation.  Father Damien
was Christlike when he went out to live with the lepers, because in such
service he realised fully what was best in him.  But he was not more
Christlike than Wagner when he realised his soul in music; or than
Shelley, when he realised his soul in song.  There is no one type for
man.  There are as many perfections as there are imperfect men.  And
while to the claims of charity a man may yield and yet be free, to the
claims of conformity no man may yield and remain free at all.

Individualism, then, is what through Socialism we are to attain to.  As a
natural result the State must give up all idea of government.  It must
give it up because, as a wise man once said many centuries before Christ,
there is such a thing as leaving mankind alone; there is no such thing as
governing mankind.  All modes of government are failures.  Despotism is
unjust to everybody, including the despot, who was probably made for
better things.  Oligarchies are unjust to the many, and ochlocracies are
unjust to the few.  High hopes were once formed of democracy; but
democracy means simply the bludgeoning of the people by the people for
the people.  It has been found out.  I must say that it was high time,
for all authority is quite degrading.  It degrades those who exercise it,
and degrades those over whom it is exercised.  When it is violently,
grossly, and cruelly used, it produces a good effect, by creating, or at
any rate bringing out, the spirit of revolt and Individualism that is to
kill it.  When it is used with a certain amount of kindness, and
accompanied by prizes and rewards, it is dreadfully demoralising.
People, in that case, are less conscious of the horrible pressure that is
being put on them, and so go through their lives in a sort of coarse
comfort, like petted animals, without ever realising that they are
probably thinking other people’s thoughts, living by other people’s
standards, wearing practically what one may call other people’s
second-hand clothes, and never being themselves for a single moment.  ‘He
who would be free,’ says a fine thinker, ‘must not conform.’  And
authority, by bribing people to conform, produces a very gross kind of
over-fed barbarism amongst us.

With authority, punishment will pass away.  This will be a great gain—a
gain, in fact, of incalculable value.  As one reads history, not in the
expurgated editions written for school-boys and passmen, but in the
original authorities of each time, one is absolutely sickened, not by the
crimes that the wicked have committed, but by the punishments that the
good have inflicted; and a community is infinitely more brutalised by the
habitual employment of punishment, than it is by the occurrence of crime.
It obviously follows that the more punishment is inflicted the more crime
is produced, and most modern legislation has clearly recognised this, and
has made it its task to diminish punishment as far as it thinks it can.
Wherever it has really diminished it, the results have always been
extremely good.  The less punishment, the less crime.  When there is no
punishment at all, crime will either cease to exist, or, if it occurs,
will be treated by physicians as a very distressing form of dementia, to
be cured by care and kindness.  For what are called criminals nowadays
are not criminals at all.  Starvation, and not sin, is the parent of
modern crime.  That indeed is the reason why our criminals are, as a
class, so absolutely uninteresting from any psychological point of view.
They are not marvellous Macbeths and terrible Vautrins.  They are merely
what ordinary, respectable, commonplace people would be if they had not
got enough to eat.  When private property is abolished there will be no
necessity for crime, no demand for it; it will cease to exist.  Of
course, all crimes are not crimes against property, though such are the
crimes that the English law, valuing what a man has more than what a man
is, punishes with the harshest and most horrible severity, if we except
the crime of murder, and regard death as worse than penal servitude, a
point on which our criminals, I believe, disagree.  But though a crime
may not be against property, it may spring from the misery and rage and
depression produced by our wrong system of property-holding, and so, when
that system is abolished, will disappear.  When each member of the
community has sufficient for his wants, and is not interfered with by his
neighbour, it will not be an object of any interest to him to interfere
with anyone else.  Jealousy, which is an extraordinary source of crime in
modern life, is an emotion closely bound up with our conceptions of
property, and under Socialism and Individualism will die out.  It is
remarkable that in communistic tribes jealousy is entirely unknown.

Now as the State is not to govern, it may be asked what the State is to
do.  The State is to be a voluntary association that will organise
labour, and be the manufacturer and distributor of necessary commodities.
The State is to make what is useful.  The individual is to make what is
beautiful.  And as I have mentioned the word labour, I cannot help saying
that a great deal of nonsense is being written and talked nowadays about
the dignity of manual labour.  There is nothing necessarily dignified
about manual labour at all, and most of it is absolutely degrading.  It
is mentally and morally injurious to man to do anything in which he does
not find pleasure, and many forms of labour are quite pleasureless
activities, and should be regarded as such.  To sweep a slushy crossing
for eight hours, on a day when the east wind is blowing is a disgusting
occupation.  To sweep it with mental, moral, or physical dignity seems to
me to be impossible.  To sweep it with joy would be appalling.  Man is
made for something better than disturbing dirt.  All work of that kind
should be done by a machine.

And I have no doubt that it will be so.  Up to the present, man has been,
to a certain extent, the slave of machinery, and there is something
tragic in the fact that as soon as man had invented a machine to do his
work he began to starve.  This, however, is, of course, the result of our
property system and our system of competition.  One man owns a machine
which does the work of five hundred men.  Five hundred men are, in
consequence, thrown out of employment, and, having no work to do, become
hungry and take to thieving.  The one man secures the produce of the
machine and keeps it, and has five hundred times as much as he should
have, and probably, which is of much more importance, a great deal more
than he really wants.  Were that machine the property of all, every one
would benefit by it.  It would be an immense advantage to the community.
All unintellectual labour, all monotonous, dull labour, all labour that
deals with dreadful things, and involves unpleasant conditions, must be
done by machinery.  Machinery must work for us in coal mines, and do all
sanitary services, and be the stoker of steamers, and clean the streets,
and run messages on wet days, and do anything that is tedious or
distressing.  At present machinery competes against man.  Under proper
conditions machinery will serve man.  There is no doubt at all that this
is the future of machinery, and just as trees grow while the country
gentleman is asleep, so while Humanity will be amusing itself, or
enjoying cultivated leisure—which, and not labour, is the aim of man—or
making beautiful things, or reading beautiful things, or simply
contemplating the world with admiration and delight, machinery will be
doing all the necessary and unpleasant work.  The fact is, that
civilisation requires slaves.  The Greeks were quite right there.  Unless
there are slaves to do the ugly, horrible, uninteresting work, culture
and contemplation become almost impossible.  Human slavery is wrong,
insecure, and demoralising.  On mechanical slavery, on the slavery of the
machine, the future of the world depends.  And when scientific men are no
longer called upon to go down to a depressing East End and distribute bad
cocoa and worse blankets to starving people, they will have delightful
leisure in which to devise wonderful and marvellous things for their own
joy and the joy of everyone else.  There will be great storages of force
for every city, and for every house if required, and this force man will
convert into heat, light, or motion, according to his needs.  Is this
Utopian?  A map of the world that does not include Utopia is not worth
even glancing at, for it leaves out the one country at which Humanity is
always landing.  And when Humanity lands there, it looks out, and, seeing
a better country, sets sail.  Progress is the realisation of Utopias.

Now, I have said that the community by means of organisation of machinery
will supply the useful things, and that the beautiful things will be made
by the individual.  This is not merely necessary, but it is the only
possible way by which we can get either the one or the other.  An
individual who has to make things for the use of others, and with
reference to their wants and their wishes, does not work with interest,
and consequently cannot put into his work what is best in him.  Upon the
other hand, whenever a community or a powerful section of a community, or
a government of any kind, attempts to dictate to the artist what he is to
do, Art either entirely vanishes, or becomes stereotyped, or degenerates
into a low and ignoble form of craft.  A work of art is the unique result
of a unique temperament.  Its beauty comes from the fact that the author
is what he is.  It has nothing to do with the fact that other people want
what they want.  Indeed, the moment that an artist takes notice of what
other people want, and tries to supply the demand, he ceases to be an
artist, and becomes a dull or an amusing craftsman, an honest or a
dishonest tradesman.  He has no further claim to be considered as an
artist.  Art is the most intense mode of Individualism that the world has
known.  I am inclined to say that it is the only real mode of
Individualism that the world has known.  Crime, which, under certain
conditions, may seem to have created Individualism, must take cognisance
of other people and interfere with them.  It belongs to the sphere of
action.  But alone, without any reference to his neighbours, without any
interference, the artist can fashion a beautiful thing; and if he does
not do it solely for his own pleasure, he is not an artist at all.

And it is to be noted that it is the fact that Art is this intense form
of Individualism that makes the public try to exercise over it in an
authority that is as immoral as it is ridiculous, and as corrupting as it
is contemptible.  It is not quite their fault.  The public has always,
and in every age, been badly brought up.  They are continually asking Art
to be popular, to please their want of taste, to flatter their absurd
vanity, to tell them what they have been told before, to show them what
they ought to be tired of seeing, to amuse them when they feel heavy
after eating too much, and to distract their thoughts when they are
wearied of their own stupidity.  Now Art should never try to be popular.
The public should try to make itself artistic.  There is a very wide
difference.  If a man of science were told that the results of his
experiments, and the conclusions that he arrived at, should be of such a
character that they would not upset the received popular notions on the
subject, or disturb popular prejudice, or hurt the sensibilities of
people who knew nothing about science; if a philosopher were told that he
had a perfect right to speculate in the highest spheres of thought,
provided that he arrived at the same conclusions as were held by those
who had never thought in any sphere at all—well, nowadays the man of
science and the philosopher would be considerably amused.  Yet it is
really a very few years since both philosophy and science were subjected
to brutal popular control, to authority in fact—the authority of either
the general ignorance of the community, or the terror and greed for power
of an ecclesiastical or governmental class.  Of course, we have to a very
great extent got rid of any attempt on the part of the community, or the
Church, or the Government, to interfere with the individualism of
speculative thought, but the attempt to interfere with the individualism
of imaginative art still lingers.  In fact, it does more than linger; it
is aggressive, offensive, and brutalising.

In England, the arts that have escaped best are the arts in which the
public take no interest.  Poetry is an instance of what I mean.  We have
been able to have fine poetry in England because the public do not read
it, and consequently do not influence it.  The public like to insult
poets because they are individual, but once they have insulted them, they
leave them alone.  In the case of the novel and the drama, arts in which
the public do take an interest, the result of the exercise of popular
authority has been absolutely ridiculous.  No country produces such
badly-written fiction, such tedious, common work in the novel form, such
silly, vulgar plays as England.  It must necessarily be so.  The popular
standard is of such a character that no artist can get to it.  It is at
once too easy and too difficult to be a popular novelist.  It is too
easy, because the requirements of the public as far as plot, style,
psychology, treatment of life, and treatment of literature are concerned
are within the reach of the very meanest capacity and the most
uncultivated mind.  It is too difficult, because to meet such
requirements the artist would have to do violence to his temperament,
would have to write not for the artistic joy of writing, but for the
amusement of half-educated people, and so would have to suppress his
individualism, forget his culture, annihilate his style, and surrender
everything that is valuable in him.  In the case of the drama, things are
a little better: the theatre-going public like the obvious, it is true,
but they do not like the tedious; and burlesque and farcical comedy, the
two most popular forms, are distinct forms of art.  Delightful work may
be produced under burlesque and farcical conditions, and in work of this
kind the artist in England is allowed very great freedom.  It is when one
comes to the higher forms of the drama that the result of popular control
is seen.  The one thing that the public dislike is novelty.  Any attempt
to extend the subject-matter of art is extremely distasteful to the
public; and yet the vitality and progress of art depend in a large
measure on the continual extension of subject-matter.  The public dislike
novelty because they are afraid of it.  It represents to them a mode of
Individualism, an assertion on the part of the artist that he selects his
own subject, and treats it as he chooses.  The public are quite right in
their attitude.  Art is Individualism, and Individualism is a disturbing
and disintegrating force.  Therein lies its immense value.  For what it
seeks to disturb is monotony of type, slavery of custom, tyranny of
habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine.  In Art, the
public accept what has been, because they cannot alter it, not because
they appreciate it.  They swallow their classics whole, and never taste
them.  They endure them as the inevitable, and as they cannot mar them,
they mouth about them.  Strangely enough, or not strangely, according to
one’s own views, this acceptance of the classics does a great deal of
harm.  The uncritical admiration of the Bible and Shakespeare in England
is an instance of what I mean.  With regard to the Bible, considerations
of ecclesiastical authority enter into the matter, so that I need not
dwell upon the point.

But in the case of Shakespeare it is quite obvious that the public really
see neither the beauties nor the defects of his plays.  If they saw the
beauties, they would not object to the development of the drama; and if
they saw the defects, they would not object to the development of the
drama either.  The fact is, the public make use of the classics of a
country as a means of checking the progress of Art.  They degrade the
classics into authorities.  They use them as bludgeons for preventing the
free expression of Beauty in new forms.  They are always asking a writer
why he does not write like somebody else, or a painter why he does not
paint like somebody else, quite oblivious of the fact that if either of
them did anything of the kind he would cease to be an artist.  A fresh
mode of Beauty is absolutely distasteful to them, and whenever it appears
they get so angry, and bewildered that they always use two stupid
expressions—one is that the work of art is grossly unintelligible; the
other, that the work of art is grossly immoral.  What they mean by these
words seems to me to be this.  When they say a work is grossly
unintelligible, they mean that the artist has said or made a beautiful
thing that is new; when they describe a work as grossly immoral, they
mean that the artist has said or made a beautiful thing that is true.
The former expression has reference to style; the latter to
subject-matter.  But they probably use the words very vaguely, as an
ordinary mob will use ready-made paving-stones.  There is not a single
real poet or prose-writer of this century, for instance, on whom the
British public have not solemnly conferred diplomas of immorality, and
these diplomas practically take the place, with us, of what in France, is
the formal recognition of an Academy of Letters, and fortunately make the
establishment of such an institution quite unnecessary in England.  Of
course, the public are very reckless in their use of the word.  That they
should have called Wordsworth an immoral poet, was only to be expected.
Wordsworth was a poet.  But that they should have called Charles Kingsley
an immoral novelist is extraordinary.  Kingsley’s prose was not of a very
fine quality.  Still, there is the word, and they use it as best they
can.  An artist is, of course, not disturbed by it.  The true artist is a
man who believes absolutely in himself, because he is absolutely himself.
But I can fancy that if an artist produced a work of art in England that
immediately on its appearance was recognised by the public, through their
medium, which is the public press, as a work that was quite intelligible
and highly moral, he would begin to seriously question whether in its
creation he had really been himself at all, and consequently whether the
work was not quite unworthy of him, and either of a thoroughly
second-rate order, or of no artistic value whatsoever.

Perhaps, however, I have wronged the public in limiting them to such
words as ‘immoral,’ ‘unintelligible,’ ‘exotic,’ and ‘unhealthy.’  There
is one other word that they use.  That word is ‘morbid.’  They do not use
it often.  The meaning of the word is so simple that they are afraid of
using it.  Still, they use it sometimes, and, now and then, one comes
across it in popular newspapers.  It is, of course, a ridiculous word to
apply to a work of art.  For what is morbidity but a mood of emotion or a
mode of thought that one cannot express?  The public are all morbid,
because the public can never find expression for anything.  The artist is
never morbid.  He expresses everything.  He stands outside his subject,
and through its medium produces incomparable and artistic effects.  To
call an artist morbid because he deals with morbidity as his
subject-matter is as silly as if one called Shakespeare mad because he
wrote ‘King Lear.’

On the whole, an artist in England gains something by being attacked.
His individuality is intensified.  He becomes more completely himself.
Of course, the attacks are very gross, very impertinent, and very
contemptible.  But then no artist expects grace from the vulgar mind, or
style from the suburban intellect.  Vulgarity and stupidity are two very
vivid facts in modern life.  One regrets them, naturally.  But there they
are.  They are subjects for study, like everything else.  And it is only
fair to state, with regard to modern journalists, that they always
apologise to one in private for what they have written against one in
public.

Within the last few years two other adjectives, it may be mentioned, have
been added to the very limited vocabulary of art-abuse that is at the
disposal of the public.  One is the word ‘unhealthy,’ the other is the
word ‘exotic.’  The latter merely expresses the rage of the momentary
mushroom against the immortal, entrancing, and exquisitely lovely orchid.
It is a tribute, but a tribute of no importance.  The word ‘unhealthy,’
however, admits of analysis.  It is a rather interesting word.  In fact,
it is so interesting that the people who use it do not know what it
means.

What does it mean?  What is a healthy, or an unhealthy work of art?  All
terms that one applies to a work of art, provided that one applies them
rationally, have reference to either its style or its subject, or to both
together.  From the point of view of style, a healthy work of art is one
whose style recognises the beauty of the material it employs, be that
material one of words or of bronze, of colour or of ivory, and uses that
beauty as a factor in producing the æsthetic effect.  From the point of
view of subject, a healthy work of art is one the choice of whose subject
is conditioned by the temperament of the artist, and comes directly out
of it.  In fine, a healthy work of art is one that has both perfection
and personality.  Of course, form and substance cannot be separated in a
work of art; they are always one.  But for purposes of analysis, and
setting the wholeness of æsthetic impression aside for a moment, we can
intellectually so separate them.  An unhealthy work of art, on the other
hand, is a work whose style is obvious, old-fashioned, and common, and
whose subject is deliberately chosen, not because the artist has any
pleasure in it, but because he thinks that the public will pay him for
it.  In fact, the popular novel that the public calls healthy is always a
thoroughly unhealthy production; and what the public call an unhealthy
novel is always a beautiful and healthy work of art.

I need hardly say that I am not, for a single moment, complaining that
the public and the public press misuse these words.  I do not see how,
with their lack of comprehension of what Art is, they could possibly use
them in the proper sense.  I am merely pointing out the misuse; and as
for the origin of the misuse and the meaning that lies behind it all, the
explanation is very simple.  It comes from the barbarous conception of
authority.  It comes from the natural inability of a community corrupted
by authority to understand or appreciate Individualism.  In a word, it
comes from that monstrous and ignorant thing that is called Public
Opinion, which, bad and well-meaning as it is when it tries to control
action, is infamous and of evil meaning when it tries to control Thought
or Art.

Indeed, there is much more to be said in favour of the physical force of
the public than there is in favour of the public’s opinion.  The former
may be fine.  The latter must be foolish.  It is often said that force is
no argument.  That, however, entirely depends on what one wants to prove.
Many of the most important problems of the last few centuries, such as
the continuance of personal government in England, or of feudalism in
France, have been solved entirely by means of physical force.  The very
violence of a revolution may make the public grand and splendid for a
moment.  It was a fatal day when the public discovered that the pen is
mightier than the paving-stone, and can be made as offensive as the
brickbat.  They at once sought for the journalist, found him, developed
him, and made him their industrious and well-paid servant.  It is greatly
to be regretted, for both their sakes.  Behind the barricade there may be
much that is noble and heroic.  But what is there behind the
leading-article but prejudice, stupidity, cant, and twaddle?  And when
these four are joined together they make a terrible force, and constitute
the new authority.

In old days men had the rack.  Now they have the press.  That is an
improvement certainly.  But still it is very bad, and wrong, and
demoralising.  Somebody—was it Burke?—called journalism the fourth
estate.  That was true at the time, no doubt.  But at the present moment
it really is the only estate.  It has eaten up the other three.  The
Lords Temporal say nothing, the Lords Spiritual have nothing to say, and
the House of Commons has nothing to say and says it.  We are dominated by
Journalism.  In America the President reigns for four years, and
Journalism governs for ever and ever.  Fortunately in America Journalism
has carried its authority to the grossest and most brutal extreme.  As a
natural consequence it has begun to create a spirit of revolt.  People
are amused by it, or disgusted by it, according to their temperaments.
But it is no longer the real force it was.  It is not seriously treated.
In England, Journalism, not, except in a few well-known instances, having
been carried to such excesses of brutality, is still a great factor, a
really remarkable power.  The tyranny that it proposes to exercise over
people’s private lives seems to me to be quite extraordinary.  The fact
is, that the public have an insatiable curiosity to know everything,
except what is worth knowing.  Journalism, conscious of this, and having
tradesman-like habits, supplies their demands.  In centuries before ours
the public nailed the ears of journalists to the pump.  That was quite
hideous.  In this century journalists have nailed their own ears to the
keyhole.  That is much worse.  And what aggravates the mischief is that
the journalists who are most to blame are not the amusing journalists who
write for what are called Society papers.  The harm is done by the
serious, thoughtful, earnest journalists, who solemnly, as they are doing
at present, will drag before the eyes of the public some incident in the
private life of a great statesman, of a man who is a leader of political
thought as he is a creator of political force, and invite the public to
discuss the incident, to exercise authority in the matter, to give their
views, and not merely to give their views, but to carry them into action,
to dictate to the man upon all other points, to dictate to his party, to
dictate to his country; in fact, to make themselves ridiculous,
offensive, and harmful.  The private lives of men and women should not be
told to the public.  The public have nothing to do with them at all.  In
France they manage these things better.  There they do not allow the
details of the trials that take place in the divorce courts to be
published for the amusement or criticism of the public.  All that the
public are allowed to know is that the divorce has taken place and was
granted on petition of one or other or both of the married parties
concerned.  In France, in fact, they limit the journalist, and allow the
artist almost perfect freedom.  Here we allow absolute freedom to the
journalist, and entirely limit the artist.  English public opinion, that
is to say, tries to constrain and impede and warp the man who makes
things that are beautiful in effect, and compels the journalist to retail
things that are ugly, or disgusting, or revolting in fact, so that we
have the most serious journalists in the world, and the most indecent
newspapers.  It is no exaggeration to talk of compulsion.  There are
possibly some journalists who take a real pleasure in publishing horrible
things, or who, being poor, look to scandals as forming a sort of
permanent basis for an income.  But there are other journalists, I feel
certain, men of education and cultivation, who really dislike publishing
these things, who know that it is wrong to do so, and only do it because
the unhealthy conditions under which their occupation is carried on
oblige them to supply the public with what the public wants, and to
compete with other journalists in making that supply as full and
satisfying to the gross popular appetite as possible.  It is a very
degrading position for any body of educated men to be placed in, and I
have no doubt that most of them feel it acutely.

However, let us leave what is really a very sordid side of the subject,
and return to the question of popular control in the matter of Art, by
which I mean Public Opinion dictating to the artist the form which he is
to use, the mode in which he is to use it, and the materials with which
he is to work.  I have pointed out that the arts which have escaped best
in England are the arts in which the public have not been interested.
They are, however, interested in the drama, and as a certain advance has
been made in the drama within the last ten or fifteen years, it is
important to point out that this advance is entirely due to a few
individual artists refusing to accept the popular want of taste as their
standard, and refusing to regard Art as a mere matter of demand and
supply.  With his marvellous and vivid personality, with a style that has
really a true colour-element in it, with his extraordinary power, not
over mere mimicry but over imaginative and intellectual creation, Mr
Irving, had his sole object been to give the public what they wanted,
could have produced the commonest plays in the commonest manner, and made
as much success and money as a man could possibly desire.  But his object
was not that.  His object was to realise his own perfection as an artist,
under certain conditions, and in certain forms of Art.  At first he
appealed to the few: now he has educated the many.  He has created in the
public both taste and temperament.  The public appreciate his artistic
success immensely.  I often wonder, however, whether the public
understand that that success is entirely due to the fact that he did not
accept their standard, but realised his own.  With their standard the
Lyceum would have been a sort of second-rate booth, as some of the
popular theatres in London are at present.  Whether they understand it or
not the fact however remains, that taste and temperament have, to a
certain extent been created in the public, and that the public is capable
of developing these qualities.  The problem then is, why do not the
public become more civilised?  They have the capacity.  What stops them?

The thing that stops them, it must be said again, is their desire to
exercise authority over the artist and over works of art.  To certain
theatres, such as the Lyceum and the Haymarket, the public seem to come
in a proper mood.  In both of these theatres there have been individual
artists, who have succeeded in creating in their audiences—and every
theatre in London has its own audience—the temperament to which Art
appeals.  And what is that temperament?  It is the temperament of
receptivity.  That is all.

If a man approaches a work of art with any desire to exercise authority
over it and the artist, he approaches it in such a spirit that he cannot
receive any artistic impression from it at all.  The work of art is to
dominate the spectator: the spectator is not to dominate the work of art.
The spectator is to be receptive.  He is to be the violin on which the
master is to play.  And the more completely he can suppress his own silly
views, his own foolish prejudices, his own absurd ideas of what Art
should be, or should not be, the more likely he is to understand and
appreciate the work of art in question.  This is, of course, quite
obvious in the case of the vulgar theatre-going public of English men and
women.  But it is equally true of what are called educated people.  For
an educated person’s ideas of Art are drawn naturally from what Art has
been, whereas the new work of art is beautiful by being what Art has
never been; and to measure it by the standard of the past is to measure
it by a standard on the rejection of which its real perfection depends.
A temperament capable of receiving, through an imaginative medium, and
under imaginative conditions, new and beautiful impressions, is the only
temperament that can appreciate a work of art.  And true as this is in
the case of the appreciation of sculpture and painting, it is still more
true of the appreciation of such arts as the drama.  For a picture and a
statue are not at war with Time.  They take no count of its succession.
In one moment their unity may be apprehended.  In the case of literature
it is different.  Time must be traversed before the unity of effect is
realised.  And so, in the drama, there may occur in the first act of the
play something whose real artistic value may not be evident to the
spectator till the third or fourth act is reached.  Is the silly fellow
to get angry and call out, and disturb the play, and annoy the artists?
No.  The honest man is to sit quietly, and know the delightful emotions
of wonder, curiosity, and suspense.  He is not to go to the play to lose
a vulgar temper.  He is to go to the play to realise an artistic
temperament.  He is to go to the play to gain an artistic temperament.
He is not the arbiter of the work of art.  He is one who is admitted to
contemplate the work of art, and, if the work be fine, to forget in its
contemplation and the egotism that mars him—the egotism of his ignorance,
or the egotism of his information.  This point about the drama is hardly,
I think, sufficiently recognised.  I can quite understand that were
‘Macbeth’ produced for the first time before a modern London audience,
many of the people present would strongly and vigorously object to the
introduction of the witches in the first act, with their grotesque
phrases and their ridiculous words.  But when the play is over one
realises that the laughter of the witches in ‘Macbeth’ is as terrible as
the laughter of madness in ‘Lear,’ more terrible than the laughter of
Iago in the tragedy of the Moor.  No spectator of art needs a more
perfect mood of receptivity than the spectator of a play.  The moment he
seeks to exercise authority he becomes the avowed enemy of Art and of
himself.  Art does not mind.  It is he who suffers.

With the novel it is the same thing.  Popular authority and the
recognition of popular authority are fatal.  Thackeray’s ‘Esmond’ is a
beautiful work of art because he wrote it to please himself.  In his
other novels, in ‘Pendennis,’ in ‘Philip,’ in ‘Vanity Fair’ even, at
times, he is too conscious of the public, and spoils his work by
appealing directly to the sympathies of the public, or by directly
mocking at them.  A true artist takes no notice whatever of the public.
The public are to him non-existent.  He has no poppied or honeyed cakes
through which to give the monster sleep or sustenance.  He leaves that to
the popular novelist.  One incomparable novelist we have now in England,
Mr George Meredith.  There are better artists in France, but France has
no one whose view of life is so large, so varied, so imaginatively true.
There are tellers of stories in Russia who have a more vivid sense of
what pain in fiction may be.  But to him belongs philosophy in fiction.
His people not merely live, but they live in thought.  One can see them
from myriad points of view.  They are suggestive.  There is soul in them
and around them.  They are interpretative and symbolic.  And he who made
them, those wonderful quickly-moving figures, made them for his own
pleasure, and has never asked the public what they wanted, has never
cared to know what they wanted, has never allowed the public to dictate
to him or influence him in any way but has gone on intensifying his own
personality, and producing his own individual work.  At first none came
to him.  That did not matter.  Then the few came to him.  That did not
change him.  The many have come now.  He is still the same.  He is an
incomparable novelist.

With the decorative arts it is not different.  The public clung with
really pathetic tenacity to what I believe were the direct traditions of
the Great Exhibition of international vulgarity, traditions that were so
appalling that the houses in which people lived were only fit for blind
people to live in.  Beautiful things began to be made, beautiful colours
came from the dyer’s hand, beautiful patterns from the artist’s brain,
and the use of beautiful things and their value and importance were set
forth.  The public were really very indignant.  They lost their temper.
They said silly things.  No one minded.  No one was a whit the worse.  No
one accepted the authority of public opinion.  And now it is almost
impossible to enter any modern house without seeing some recognition of
good taste, some recognition of the value of lovely surroundings, some
sign of appreciation of beauty.  In fact, people’s houses are, as a rule,
quite charming nowadays.  People have been to a very great extent
civilised.  It is only fair to state, however, that the extraordinary
success of the revolution in house-decoration and furniture and the like
has not really been due to the majority of the public developing a very
fine taste in such matters.  It has been chiefly due to the fact that the
craftsmen of things so appreciated the pleasure of making what was
beautiful, and woke to such a vivid consciousness of the hideousness and
vulgarity of what the public had previously wanted, that they simply
starved the public out.  It would be quite impossible at the present
moment to furnish a room as rooms were furnished a few years ago, without
going for everything to an auction of second-hand furniture from some
third-rate lodging-house.  The things are no longer made.  However they
may object to it, people must nowadays have something charming in their
surroundings.  Fortunately for them, their assumption of authority in
these art-matters came to entire grief.

It is evident, then, that all authority in such things is bad.  People
sometimes inquire what form of government is most suitable for an artist
to live under.  To this question there is only one answer.  The form of
government that is most suitable to the artist is no government at all.
Authority over him and his art is ridiculous.  It has been stated that
under despotisms artists have produced lovely work.  This is not quite
so.  Artists have visited despots, not as subjects to be tyrannised over,
but as wandering wonder-makers, as fascinating vagrant personalities, to
be entertained and charmed and suffered to be at peace, and allowed to
create.  There is this to be said in favour of the despot, that he, being
an individual, may have culture, while the mob, being a monster, has
none.  One who is an Emperor and King may stoop down to pick up a brush
for a painter, but when the democracy stoops down it is merely to throw
mud.  And yet the democracy have not so far to stoop as the emperor.  In
fact, when they want to throw mud they have not to stoop at all.  But
there is no necessity to separate the monarch from the mob; all authority
is equally bad.

There are three kinds of despots.  There is the despot who tyrannises
over the body.  There is the despot who tyrannises over the soul.  There
is the despot who tyrannises over the soul and body alike.  The first is
called the Prince.  The second is called the Pope.  The third is called
the People.  The Prince may be cultivated.  Many Princes have been.  Yet
in the Prince there is danger.  One thinks of Dante at the bitter feast
in Verona, of Tasso in Ferrara’s madman’s cell.  It is better for the
artist not to live with Princes.  The Pope may be cultivated.  Many Popes
have been; the bad Popes have been.  The bad Popes loved Beauty, almost
as passionately, nay, with as much passion as the good Popes hated
Thought.  To the wickedness of the Papacy humanity owes much.  The
goodness of the Papacy owes a terrible debt to humanity.  Yet, though the
Vatican has kept the rhetoric of its thunders, and lost the rod of its
lightning, it is better for the artist not to live with Popes.  It was a
Pope who said of Cellini to a conclave of Cardinals that common laws and
common authority were not made for men such as he; but it was a Pope who
thrust Cellini into prison, and kept him there till he sickened with
rage, and created unreal visions for himself, and saw the gilded sun
enter his room, and grew so enamoured of it that he sought to escape, and
crept out from tower to tower, and falling through dizzy air at dawn,
maimed himself, and was by a vine-dresser covered with vine leaves, and
carried in a cart to one who, loving beautiful things, had care of him.
There is danger in Popes.  And as for the People, what of them and their
authority?  Perhaps of them and their authority one has spoken enough.
Their authority is a thing blind, deaf, hideous, grotesque, tragic,
amusing, serious, and obscene.  It is impossible for the artist to live
with the People.  All despots bribe.  The people bribe and brutalise.
Who told them to exercise authority?  They were made to live, to listen,
and to love.  Someone has done them a great wrong.  They have marred
themselves by imitation of their inferiors.  They have taken the sceptre
of the Prince.  How should they use it?  They have taken the triple tiara
of the Pope.  How should they carry its burden?  They are as a clown
whose heart is broken.  They are as a priest whose soul is not yet born.
Let all who love Beauty pity them.  Though they themselves love not
Beauty, yet let them pity themselves.  Who taught them the trick of
tyranny?

There are many other things that one might point out.  One might point
out how the Renaissance was great, because it sought to solve no social
problem, and busied itself not about such things, but suffered the
individual to develop freely, beautifully, and naturally, and so had
great and individual artists, and great and individual men.  One might
point out how Louis XIV., by creating the modern state, destroyed the
individualism of the artist, and made things monstrous in their monotony
of repetition, and contemptible in their conformity to rule, and
destroyed throughout all France all those fine freedoms of expression
that had made tradition new in beauty, and new modes one with antique
form.  But the past is of no importance.  The present is of no
importance.  It is with the future that we have to deal.  For the past is
what man should not have been.  The present is what man ought not to be.
The future is what artists are.

It will, of course, be said that such a scheme as is set forth here is
quite unpractical, and goes against human nature.  This is perfectly
true.  It is unpractical, and it goes against human nature.  This is why
it is worth carrying out, and that is why one proposes it.  For what is a
practical scheme?  A practical scheme is either a scheme that is already
in existence, or a scheme that could be carried out under existing
conditions.  But it is exactly the existing conditions that one objects
to; and any scheme that could accept these conditions is wrong and
foolish.  The conditions will be done away with, and human nature will
change.  The only thing that one really knows about human nature is that
it changes.  Change is the one quality we can predicate of it.  The
systems that fail are those that rely on the permanency of human nature,
and not on its growth and development.  The error of Louis XIV. was that
he thought human nature would always be the same.  The result of his
error was the French Revolution.  It was an admirable result.  All the
results of the mistakes of governments are quite admirable.

It is to be noted also that Individualism does not come to man with any
sickly cant about duty, which merely means doing what other people want
because they want it; or any hideous cant about self-sacrifice, which is
merely a survival of savage mutilation.  In fact, it does not come to man
with any claims upon him at all.  It comes naturally and inevitably out
of man.  It is the point to which all development tends.  It is the
differentiation to which all organisms grow.  It is the perfection that
is inherent in every mode of life, and towards which every mode of life
quickens.  And so Individualism exercises no compulsion over man.  On the
contrary, it says to man that he should suffer no compulsion to be
exercised over him.  It does not try to force people to be good.  It
knows that people are good when they are let alone.  Man will develop
Individualism out of himself.  Man is now so developing Individualism.
To ask whether Individualism is practical is like asking whether
Evolution is practical.  Evolution is the law of life, and there is no
evolution except towards Individualism.  Where this tendency is not
expressed, it is a case of artificially-arrested growth, or of disease,
or of death.

Individualism will also be unselfish and unaffected.  It has been pointed
out that one of the results of the extraordinary tyranny of authority is
that words are absolutely distorted from their proper and simple meaning,
and are used to express the obverse of their right signification.  What
is true about Art is true about Life.  A man is called affected,
nowadays, if he dresses as he likes to dress.  But in doing that he is
acting in a perfectly natural manner.  Affectation, in such matters,
consists in dressing according to the views of one’s neighbour, whose
views, as they are the views of the majority, will probably be extremely
stupid.  Or a man is called selfish if he lives in the manner that seems
to him most suitable for the full realisation of his own personality; if,
in fact, the primary aim of his life is self-development.  But this is
the way in which everyone should live.  Selfishness is not living as one
wishes to live, it is asking others to live as one wishes to live.  And
unselfishness is letting other people’s lives alone, not interfering with
them.  Selfishness always aims at creating around it an absolute
uniformity of type.  Unselfishness recognises infinite variety of type as
a delightful thing, accepts it, acquiesces in it, enjoys it.  It is not
selfish to think for oneself.  A man who does not think for himself does
not think at all.  It is grossly selfish to require of ones neighbour
that he should think in the same way, and hold the same opinions.  Why
should he?  If he can think, he will probably think differently.  If he
cannot think, it is monstrous to require thought of any kind from him.  A
red rose is not selfish because it wants to be a red rose.  It would be
horribly selfish if it wanted all the other flowers in the garden to be
both red and roses.  Under Individualism people will be quite natural and
absolutely unselfish, and will know the meanings of the words, and
realise them in their free, beautiful lives.  Nor will men be egotistic
as they are now.  For the egotist is he who makes claims upon others, and
the Individualist will not desire to do that.  It will not give him
pleasure.  When man has realised Individualism, he will also realise
sympathy and exercise it freely and spontaneously.  Up to the present man
has hardly cultivated sympathy at all.  He has merely sympathy with pain,
and sympathy with pain is not the highest form of sympathy.  All sympathy
is fine, but sympathy with suffering is the least fine mode.  It is
tainted with egotism.  It is apt to become morbid.  There is in it a
certain element of terror for our own safety.  We become afraid that we
ourselves might be as the leper or as the blind, and that no man would
have care of us.  It is curiously limiting, too.  One should sympathise
with the entirety of life, not with life’s sores and maladies merely, but
with life’s joy and beauty and energy and health and freedom.  The wider
sympathy is, of course, the more difficult.  It requires more
unselfishness.  Anybody can sympathise with the sufferings of a friend,
but it requires a very fine nature—it requires, in fact, the nature of a
true Individualist—to sympathise with a friend’s success.

In the modern stress of competition and struggle for place, such sympathy
is naturally rare, and is also very much stifled by the immoral ideal of
uniformity of type and conformity to rule which is so prevalent
everywhere, and is perhaps most obnoxious in England.

Sympathy with pain there will, of course, always be.  It is one of the
first instincts of man.  The animals which are individual, the higher
animals, that is to say, share it with us.  But it must be remembered
that while sympathy with joy intensifies the sum of joy in the world,
sympathy with pain does not really diminish the amount of pain.  It may
make man better able to endure evil, but the evil remains.  Sympathy with
consumption does not cure consumption; that is what Science does.  And
when Socialism has solved the problem of poverty, and Science solved the
problem of disease, the area of the sentimentalists will be lessened, and
the sympathy of man will be large, healthy, and spontaneous.  Man will
have joy in the contemplation of the joyous life of others.

For it is through joy that the Individualism of the future will develop
itself.  Christ made no attempt to reconstruct society, and consequently
the Individualism that he preached to man could be realised only through
pain or in solitude.  The ideals that we owe to Christ are the ideals of
the man who abandons society entirely, or of the man who resists society
absolutely.  But man is naturally social.  Even the Thebaid became
peopled at last.  And though the cenobite realises his personality, it is
often an impoverished personality that he so realises.  Upon the other
hand, the terrible truth that pain is a mode through which man may
realise himself exercises a wonderful fascination over the world.
Shallow speakers and shallow thinkers in pulpits and on platforms often
talk about the world’s worship of pleasure, and whine against it.  But it
is rarely in the world’s history that its ideal has been one of joy and
beauty.  The worship of pain has far more often dominated the world.
Mediævalism, with its saints and martyrs, its love of self-torture, its
wild passion for wounding itself, its gashing with knives, and its
whipping with rods—Mediævalism is real Christianity, and the mediæval
Christ is the real Christ.  When the Renaissance dawned upon the world,
and brought with it the new ideals of the beauty of life and the joy of
living, men could not understand Christ.  Even Art shows us that.  The
painters of the Renaissance drew Christ as a little boy playing with
another boy in a palace or a garden, or lying back in his mother’s arms,
smiling at her, or at a flower, or at a bright bird; or as a noble,
stately figure moving nobly through the world; or as a wonderful figure
rising in a sort of ecstasy from death to life.  Even when they drew him
crucified they drew him as a beautiful God on whom evil men had inflicted
suffering.  But he did not preoccupy them much.  What delighted them was
to paint the men and women whom they admired, and to show the loveliness
of this lovely earth.  They painted many religious pictures—in fact, they
painted far too many, and the monotony of type and motive is wearisome,
and was bad for art.  It was the result of the authority of the public in
art-matters, and is to be deplored.  But their soul was not in the
subject.  Raphael was a great artist when he painted his portrait of the
Pope.  When he painted his Madonnas and infant Christs, he is not a great
artist at all.  Christ had no message for the Renaissance, which was
wonderful because it brought an ideal at variance with his, and to find
the presentation of the real Christ we must go to mediæval art.  There he
is one maimed and marred; one who is not comely to look on, because
Beauty is a joy; one who is not in fair raiment, because that may be a
joy also: he is a beggar who has a marvellous soul; he is a leper whose
soul is divine; he needs neither property nor health; he is a God
realising his perfection through pain.

The evolution of man is slow.  The injustice of men is great.  It was
necessary that pain should be put forward as a mode of self-realisation.
Even now, in some places in the world, the message of Christ is
necessary.  No one who lived in modern Russia could possibly realise his
perfection except by pain.  A few Russian artists have realised
themselves in Art; in a fiction that is mediæval in character, because
its dominant note is the realisation of men through suffering.  But for
those who are not artists, and to whom there is no mode of life but the
actual life of fact, pain is the only door to perfection.  A Russian who
lives happily under the present system of government in Russia must
either believe that man has no soul, or that, if he has, it is not worth
developing.  A Nihilist who rejects all authority, because he knows
authority to be evil, and welcomes all pain, because through that he
realises his personality, is a real Christian.  To him the Christian
ideal is a true thing.

And yet, Christ did not revolt against authority.  He accepted the
imperial authority of the Roman Empire and paid tribute.  He endured the
ecclesiastical authority of the Jewish Church, and would not repel its
violence by any violence of his own.  He had, as I said before, no scheme
for the reconstruction of society.  But the modern world has schemes.  It
proposes to do away with poverty and the suffering that it entails.  It
desires to get rid of pain, and the suffering that pain entails.  It
trusts to Socialism and to Science as its methods.  What it aims at is an
Individualism expressing itself through joy.  This Individualism will be
larger, fuller, lovelier than any Individualism has ever been.  Pain is
not the ultimate mode of perfection.  It is merely provisional and a
protest.  It has reference to wrong, unhealthy, unjust surroundings.
When the wrong, and the disease, and the injustice are removed, it will
have no further place.  It will have done its work.  It was a great work,
but it is almost over.  Its sphere lessens every day.

Nor will man miss it.  For what man has sought for is, indeed, neither
pain nor pleasure, but simply Life.  Man has sought to live intensely,
fully, perfectly.  When he can do so without exercising restraint on
others, or suffering it ever, and his activities are all pleasurable to
him, he will be saner, healthier, more civilised, more himself.  Pleasure
is Nature’s test, her sign of approval.  When man is happy, he is in
harmony with himself and his environment.  The new Individualism, for
whose service Socialism, whether it wills it or not, is working, will be
perfect harmony.  It will be what the Greeks sought for, but could not,
except in Thought, realise completely, because they had slaves, and fed
them; it will be what the Renaissance sought for, but could not realise
completely except in Art, because they had slaves, and starved them.  It
will be complete, and through it each man will attain to his perfection.
The new Individualism is the new Hellenism.


PROLOGUE.

SCENE.--_A Russian Inn._

_Large door opening on snowy landscape at back of stage._

_PETER SABOUROFF and MICHAEL._


PETER (_warming his hands at a stove_). Has Vera not come back yet,
Michael?

MICH. No, Father Peter, not yet; 'tis a good three miles to the post
office, and she has to milk the cows besides, and that dun one is a rare
plaguey creature for a wench to handle.

PETER. Why didn't you go with her, you young fool? she'll never love you
unless you are always at her heels; women like to be bothered.

MICH. She says I bother her too much already, Father Peter, and I fear
she'll never love me after all.

PETER. Tut, tut, boy, why shouldn't she? you're young and wouldn't be
ill-favoured either, had God or thy mother given thee another face.
Aren't you one of Prince Maraloffski's gamekeepers; and haven't you got
a good grass farm, and the best cow in the village? What more does a
girl want?

MICH. But Vera, Father Peter--

PETER. Vera, my lad, has got too many ideas; I don't think much of ideas
myself; I've got on well enough in life without 'em; why shouldn't my
children? There's Dmitri! could have stayed here and kept the inn; many
a young lad would have jumped at the offer in these hard times; but he,
scatter-brained featherhead of a boy, must needs go off to Moscow to
study the law! What does he want knowing about the law! let a man do his
duty, say I, and no one will trouble him.

MICH. Ay! but Father Peter, they say a good lawyer can break the law as
often as he likes, and no one can say him nay.

PETER. That is about all they are good for; and there he stays, and has
not written a line to us for four months now--a good son that, eh?

MICH. Come, come, Father Peter, Dmitri's letters must have gone
astray--perhaps the new postman can't read; he looks stupid enough, and
Dmitri, why, he was the best fellow in the village. Do you remember how
he shot the bear at the barn in the great winter?

PETER. Ay, it was a good shot; I never did a better myself.

MICH. And as for dancing, he tired out three fiddlers Christmas come two
years.

PETER. Ay, ay, he was a merry lad. It is the girl that has the
seriousness--she goes about as solemn as a priest for days at a time.

MICH. Vera is always thinking of others.

PETER. There is her mistake, boy. Let God and our Little Father look to
the world. It is none of my work to mend my neighbour's thatch. Why,
last winter old Michael was frozen to death in his sleigh in the
snowstorm, and his wife and children starved afterwards when the hard
times came; but what business was it of mine? I didn't make the world.
Let God and the Czar look to it. And then the blight came, and the black
plague with it, and the priests couldn't bury the people fast enough,
and they lay dead on the roads--men and women both. But what business
was it of mine? I didn't make the world. Let God and the Czar look to
it. Or two autumns ago, when the river overflowed on a sudden, and the
children's school was carried away and drowned every girl and boy in it.
I didn't make the world--let God and the Czar look to it.

MICH. But, Father Peter--

PETER. No, no, boy; no man could live if he took his neighbour's pack
on his shoulders. (_Enter VERA in peasant's dress._) Well, my girl,
you've been long enough away--where is the letter?

VERA. There is none to-day, Father.

PETER. I knew it.

VERA. But there will be one to-morrow, Father.

PETER. Curse him, for an ungrateful son.

VERA. Oh, Father, don't say that; he must be sick.

PETER. Ay! sick of profligacy, perhaps.

VERA. How dare you say that of him, Father? You know that is not true.

PETER. Where does the money go, then? Michael, listen. I gave Dmitri
half his mother's fortune to bring with him to pay the lawyer folk of
Moscow. He has only written three times, and every time for more money.
He got it, not at my wish, but at hers (_pointing to VERA_), and now for
five months, close on six almost, we have heard nothing from him.

VERA. Father, he will come back.

PETER. Ay! the prodigals always return; but let him never darken my
doors again.

VERA (_sitting down pensive_). Some evil has come on him; he must be
dead! Oh! Michael, I am so wretched about Dmitri.

MICH. Will you never love any one but him, Vera?

VERA (_smiling_). I don't know; there is so much else to do in the world
but love.

MICH. Nothing else worth doing, Vera.

PETER. What noise is that, Vera? (_A metallic clink is heard._)

VERA (_rising and going to the door_). I don't know, Father; it is not
like the cattle bells, or I would think Nicholas had come from the fair.
Oh! Father! it is soldiers!--coming down the hill--there is one of them
on horseback. How pretty they look! But there are some men with them
with chains on! They must be robbers. Oh! don't let them in, Father; I
couldn't look at them.

PETER. Men in chains! Why, we are in luck, my child! I heard this was to
be the new road to Siberia, to bring the prisoners to the mines; but I
didn't believe it. My fortune is made! Bustle, Vera, bustle! I'll die a
rich man after all. There will be no lack of good customers now. An
honest man should have the chance of making his living out of rascals
now and then.

VERA. Are these men rascals, Father? What have they done?

PETER. I reckon they're some of those Nihilists the priest warns us
against. Don't stand there idle, my girl.

VERA. I suppose, then, they are all wicked men.

(_Sound of soldiers outside; cry of "Halt!" enter Russian officer with a
body of soldiers and eight men in chains, raggedly dressed; one of them
on entering hurriedly puts his coat above his ears and hides his face;
some soldiers guard the door, others sit down; the prisoners stand._)

COLONEL. Innkeeper!

PETER. Yes, Colonel.

COLONEL (_pointing to Nihilists_). Give these men some bread and water.

PETER (_to himself_). I shan't make much out of that order.

COLONEL. As for myself, what have you got fit to eat?

PETER. Some good dried venison, your Excellency--and some rye whisky.

COLONEL. Nothing else?

PETER. Why, more whisky, your Excellency.

COLONEL. What clods these peasants are! You have a better room than
this?

PETER. Yes, sir.

COLONEL. Bring me there. Sergeant, post your picket outside, and see
that these scoundrels do not communicate with any one. No letter
writing, you dogs, or you'll be flogged for it. Now for the venison.
(_To PETER bowing before him._) Get out of the way, you fool! Who is
that girl? (_sees VERA_).

PETER. My daughter, your Highness.

COLONEL. Can she read and write?

PETER. Ay, that she can, sir.

COLONEL. Then she is a dangerous woman. No peasant should be allowed to
do anything of the kind. Till your fields, store your harvests, pay your
taxes, and obey your masters--that is your duty.

VERA. Who are our masters?

COLONEL. Young woman, these men are going to the mines for life for
asking the same foolish question.

VERA. Then they have been unjustly condemned.

PETER. Vera, keep your tongue quiet. She is a foolish girl, sir, who
talks too much.

COLONEL. Every woman does talk too much. Come, where is this venison?
Count, I am waiting for you. How can you see anything in a girl with
coarse hands? (_He passes with PETER and his aide-de-camp into an inner
room._)

VERA (_to one of the Nihilists_). Won't you sit down? you must be tired.

SERGEANT. Come now, young woman, no talking to my prisoners.

VERA. I shall speak to them. How much do you want?

SERGEANT. How much have you?

VERA. Will you let these men sit down if I give you this? (_Takes off
her peasant's necklace._) It is all I have; it was my mother's.

SERGEANT. Well, it looks pretty enough, and is heavy too. What do you
want with these men?

VERA. They are hungry and tired. Let me go to them?

ONE OF THE SOLDIERS. Let the wench be, if she pays us.

SERGEANT. Well, have your way. If the Colonel sees you, you may have to
come with us, my pretty one.

VERA (_advances to the Nihilists_). Sit down; you must be tired.
(_Serves them food._) What are you?

A PRISONER. Nihilists.

VERA. Who put you in chains?

PRISONER. Our Father the Czar.

VERA. Why?

PRISONER. For loving liberty too well.

VERA (_to prisoner who hides his face_). What did you want to do?

DMITRI. To give liberty to thirty millions of people enslaved to one
man.

VERA (_startled at the voice_). What is your name?

DMITRI. I have no name.

VERA. Where are your friends?

DMITRI. I have no friends.

VERA. Let me see your face!

DMITRI. You will see nothing but suffering in it. They have tortured me.

VERA (_tears the cloak from his face_). Oh, God! Dmitri! my brother!

DMITRI. Hush! Vera; be calm. You must not let my father know; it would
kill him. I thought I could free Russia. I heard men talk of Liberty one
night in a café. I had never heard the word before. It seemed to be a
new god they spoke of. I joined them. It was there all the money went.
Five months ago they seized us. They found me printing the paper. I am
going to the mines for life. I could not write. I thought it would be
better to let you think I was dead; for they are bringing me to a living
tomb.

VERA (_looking round_). You must escape, Dmitri. I will take your place.

DMITRI. Impossible! You can only revenge us.

VERA. I shall revenge you.

DMITRI. Listen! there is a house in Moscow--

SERGEANT. Prisoners, attention!--the Colonel is coming--young woman,
your time is up.

(_Enter COLONEL, AIDE-DE-CAMP and PETER._)

PETER. I hope your Highness is pleased with the venison. I shot it
myself.

COLONEL. It had been better had you talked less about it. Sergeant, get
ready. (_Gives purse to PETER._) Here, you cheating rascal!

PETER. My fortune is made! long live your Highness. I hope your Highness
will come often this way.

COLONEL. By Saint Nicholas, I hope not. It is too cold here for me. (_To
VERA._) Young girl, don't ask questions again about what does not
concern you. I will not forget your face.

VERA. Nor I yours, or what you are doing.

COLONEL. You peasants are getting too saucy since you ceased to be
serfs, and the knout is the best school for you to learn politics in.
Sergeant, proceed.

(_The COLONEL turns and goes to top of stage. The prisoners pass out
double file; as DMITRI passes VERA he lets a piece of paper fall on the
ground; she puts her foot on it and remains immobile._)

PETER (_who has been counting the money the COLONEL gave him_). Long
life to your Highness. I will hope to see another batch soon. (_Suddenly
catches sight of DMITRI as he is going out of the door, and screams and
rushes up._) Dmitri! Dmitri! my God! what brings you here? he is
innocent, I tell you. I'll pay for him. Take your money (_flings money
on the ground_), take all I have, give me my son. Villains! Villains!
where are you bringing him?

COLONEL. To Siberia, old man.

PETER. No, no; take me instead.

COLONEL. He is a Nihilist.

PETER. You lie! you lie! He is innocent. (_The soldiers force him back
with their guns and shut the door against him. He beats with his fists
against it._) Dmitri! Dmitri! a Nihilist! (_Falls down on floor._)

VERA (_who has remained motionless, picks up paper now from under her
feet and reads_). "99 Rue Tchernavaya, Moscow. To strangle whatever
nature is in me; neither to love nor to be loved; neither to pity nor to
be pitied; neither to marry nor to be given in marriage, till the end is
come." My brother, I shall keep the oath. (_Kisses the paper._) You
shall be revenged!

(_VERA stands immobile, holding paper in her lifted hand. PETER is lying
on the floor. MICHAEL, who has just come in, is bending over him._)

SCENE.--_99 Rue Tchernavaya, Moscow. A large garret lit by oil lamps
hung from ceiling. Some masked men standing silent and apart from one
another. A man in a scarlet mask is writing at a table. Door at back.
Man in yellow with drawn sword at it. Knocks heard. Figures in cloaks
and masks enter._


_Password._ Per crucem ad lucem.

_Answer._ Per sanguinem ad libertatem.

(_Clock strikes. CONSPIRATORS form a semicircle in the middle of the
stage._)

[2]PRESIDENT. What is the word?

FIRST CONSP. Nabat.

PRES. The answer?

SECOND CONSP. Kalit.

PRES. What hour is it?

THIRD CONSP. The hour to suffer.

PRES. What day?

FOURTH CONSP. The day of oppression.

PRES. What year?

FIFTH CONSP. Since the Revolution of France, the ninth year.[2]

PRES. How many are we in number?

SIXTH CONSP. Ten, nine, and three.

PRES. The Galilæan had less to conquer the world; but what is our
mission?

SEVENTH CONSP. To give freedom.

PRES. Our creed?

EIGHTH CONSP. To annihilate.

PRES. Our duty?

NINTH CONSP. To obey.

PRES. Brothers, the questions have been answered well. There are none
but Nihilists present. Let us see each other's faces. (_The CONSPIRATORS
unmask._) Michael, recite the oath.

MICHAEL. To strangle whatever nature is in us; neither to love nor to be
loved, neither to pity nor to be pitied, neither to marry nor to be
given in marriage, till the end is come; to stab secretly by night; to
drop poison in the glass; to set father against son, and husband against
wife; without fear, without hope, without future, to suffer, to
annihilate, to revenge.

PRES. Are we all agreed?

CONSPIRATORS. We are all agreed. (_They disperse in various directions
about the stage._)

PRES. 'Tis after the hour, Michael, and she is not yet here.

MICH. Would that she were! We can do little without her.

ALEXIS. She cannot have been seized, President? but the police are on
her track, I know.

MICH. You always seem to know a good deal about the movements of the
police in Moscow--too much for an honest conspirator.

PRES. If those dogs have caught her, [3]the red flag of the people will
float on a barricade in[3] every street till we find her! It was foolish
of her to go to the Grand Duke's ball. I told her so, but she said she
wanted to see the Czar and all his cursed brood face to face once.

ALEXIS. Gone to the State ball?

MICH. I have no fear. She is as hard to capture as a she-wolf is, and
twice as dangerous; besides, she is well disguised. But is there any
news from the Palace to-night, President? What is that bloody[4] despot
doing now besides torturing his only son? Have any of you seen him? One
hears strange stories about him. They say he loves the people; but a
king's son never does that. You cannot breed them like that.

PRES. Since he came back from abroad a year ago his father has kept him
in close prison in his palace.

MICH. An excellent training to make him a tyrant in his turn; but is
there any news, I say?

PRES. A council is to be held to-morrow, at four o'clock, on some secret
business the spies cannot find out.

MICH. A council in a king's palace is sure to be about some bloody work
or other. But in what room is this council to be held?

PRES. (_reading from letter_). In the yellow tapestry room called after
the Empress Catherine.

MICH. I care not for such long-sounding names. I would know where it is.

PRES. I cannot tell, Michael. I know more about the insides of prisons
than of palaces.

MICH. (_speaking suddenly to ALEXIS_). Where is this room, Alexis?

ALEXIS. It is on the first floor, looking out on to the inner courtyard.
But why do you ask, Michael?

MICH. Nothing, nothing, boy! I merely take a great interest in the
Czar's life and movements, and I knew you could tell me all about the
palace. Every poor student of medicine in Moscow knows all about king's
houses. It is their duty, is it not?

ALEXIS (_aside_). Can Michael suspect me? There is something strange in
his manner to-night. Why doesn't she come? The whole fire of revolution
seems fallen into dull ashes when she is not here.

[5]MICH. Have you cured many patients lately, at your hospital, boy?

ALEX. There is one who lies sick to death I would fain cure, but cannot.

MICH. Ay, and who is that?

ALEX. Russia, our mother.

MICH. The curing of Russia is surgeon's business, and must be done by
the knife. I like not your method of medicine.[5]

PRES. Professor, we have read the proofs of your last article; it is
very good indeed.

MICH. What is it about, Professor?

PROFESSOR. The subject, my good brother, is assassination considered as
a method of political reform.

MICH. I think little of pen and ink in revolutions. One dagger will do
more than a hundred epigrams. Still, let us read this scholar's last
production. Give it to me. I will read it myself.

PROF. Brother, you never mind your stops; let Alexis read it.

MICH. Ay! he is as tripping of speech as if he were some young
aristocrat; but for my own part I care not for the stops so that the
sense be plain.

ALEX. (_reading_). "The past has belonged to the tyrant, and he has
defiled it; ours is the future, and we shall make it holy." Ay! let us
make the future holy; let there be one revolution at least which is not
bred in crime, nurtured in murder!

MICH. They have spoken to us by the sword, and by the sword we shall
answer! You are too delicate for us, Alexis. There should be none here
but men whose hands are rough with labour or red with blood.

PRES. Peace, Michael, peace! He is the bravest heart among us.

MICH. (_aside_). He will need to be brave to-night.

(_The sound of sleigh bells is heard outside._)

VOICE (_outside_). Per crucem ad lucem.

_Answer of man on guard._ Per sanguinem ad libertatem.

MICH. Who is that?

VERA. God save the people!

PRES. Welcome, Vera, welcome! [6]We have been sick at heart till we saw
you; but now methinks the star of freedom has come to wake us from the
night.[6]

VERA. [7]It is night, indeed, brother! Night without moon or star![7]
Russia is smitten to the heart! The man Ivan whom men call the Czar
strikes now at our mother with a dagger deadlier than ever forged by
tyranny against a people's life!

MICH. What has the tyrant[8] done now?

VERA. To-morrow martial law is to be proclaimed in Russia.

OMNES. Martial law! We are lost! We are lost!

ALEX. Martial law! Impossible!

MICH. Fool, nothing is impossible in Russia but reform.

VERA. Ay, martial law. The last right to which the people clung has been
taken from them. Without trial, without appeal, without accuser even,
our brothers will be taken from their houses, shot in the streets like
dogs, sent away to die in the snow, to starve in the dungeon, to rot in
the mine. Do you know what martial law means? It means the strangling of
a whole nation. [9]The streets will be filled with soldiers night and
day; there will be sentinels at every door.[9] No man dare walk abroad
now but the spy or the traitor. Cooped up in the dens we hide in,
meeting by stealth, speaking with bated breath; what good can we do now
for Russia?

PRES. We can suffer at least.

VERA. We have done that too much already. The hour is now come to
annihilate and to revenge.

PRES. Up to this the people have borne everything.

VERA. Because they have understood nothing. But now we, the Nihilists,
have given them the tree of knowledge to eat of and the day of silent
suffering is over for Russia.

MICH. Martial law, Vera! This is fearful tidings you bring.

PRES. It is the death warrant of liberty in Russia.

VERA. Or the tocsin of[10] revolution.

MICH. Are you sure it is true?

VERA. Here is the proclamation. I stole it myself at the ball to-night
from a young fool, one of Prince Paul's secretaries, who had been given
it to copy. It was that which made me so late.

(_VERA hands proclamation to MICHAEL, who reads it._)

MICH. "To ensure the public safety--martial law. By order of the Czar,
father of his people." The father of his people!

VERA. Ay! a father whose name shall not be hallowed, whose kingdom shall
change to a republic, whose trespasses shall not be forgiven him,
because he has robbed us of our daily bread; with whom is neither might,
nor right, nor glory, now or for ever.

PRES. It must be about this that the council meet to-morrow. It has not
yet been signed.

ALEX. It shall not be while I have a tongue to plead with.

MICH. Or while I have hands to smite with.

VERA. Martial law! O God, how easy it is for a king to kill his people
by thousands, but we cannot rid ourselves of one crowned man in Europe!
What is there of awful majesty in these men which makes the hand
unsteady, the dagger treacherous, the pistol-shot harmless? Are they not
men of like passions with ourselves, vulnerable to the same diseases, of
flesh and blood not different from our own? What made Olgiati tremble at
the supreme crisis of that Roman life, [11]and Guido's nerve fail him
when he should have been of iron and of steel? A plague, I say, on these
fools of Naples, Berlin, and Spain![11] Methinks that if I stood face to
face with one of the crowned men my eye would see more clearly, my aim
be more sure, my whole body gain a strength and power that was not my
own! Oh, to think what stands between us and freedom in Europe! a few
old men, wrinkled, feeble, tottering dotards whom a boy could strangle
for a ducat, or a woman stab in a night-time. And these are the things
that keep us from democracy, that keep us from liberty. But now
methinks the brood of men is dead and the dull earth grown sick of
child-bearing, else would no crowned dog pollute God's air by living.

OMNES. Try us! Try us! Try us!

MICH. We shall try thee, too, some day, Vera.

VERA. I pray God thou mayest! Have I not strangled whatever nature is in
me, and shall I not keep my oath?

MICH. (_to PRESIDENT_). Martial law, President! Come, there is no time
to be lost. We have twelve hours yet before us till the council meet.
[12]Twelve hours! One can overthrow a dynasty in less time than
that.[12]

PRES. [13]Ay! or lose one's own head.[13]

(_MICHAEL and the PRESIDENT retire to one corner of the stage and sit
whispering. VERA takes up the proclamation, and reads it to herself;
ALEXIS watches and suddenly rushes up to her._)

ALEX. Vera!

VERA. Alexis, you here! Foolish boy, have I not prayed you to stay away?
All of us here are doomed to die before our time, fated to expiate by
suffering whatever good we do; but you, with your [14]bright boyish
face,[14] you are too young to die yet.

ALEX. One is never too young to die for one's country!

VERA. Why do you come here night after night?

ALEX. Because I love the people.

VERA. But your fellow-students must miss you. Are there no traitors
among them? You know what spies there are in the University here. O
Alexis, you must go! You see how desperate suffering has made us. There
is no room here for a nature like yours. You must not come again.

ALEX. Why do you think so poorly of me? Why should I live while my
brothers suffer?

VERA. You spake to me of your mother once. You said you loved her. Oh,
think of her!

ALEX. I have no mother now but Russia, my life is hers to take or give
away; but to-night I am here to see you. They tell me you are leaving
for Novgorod to-morrow.

VERA. I must. They are getting faint-hearted there, and I would fan the
flame of this revolution into such a blaze that the eyes of all kings in
Europe shall be blinded. If martial law is passed they will need me all
the more there. There is no limit, it seems, to the tyranny of one man;
but there shall be a limit to the suffering of a whole people.

ALEX. God knows it, I am with you. But you must not go. [15]The police
are watching every train for you.[15] When you are seized they have
orders to place you without trial in the lowest dungeon of the
palace.[16] I know it--no matter how. [17]Oh, think how without you the
sun goes from our life, how the people will lose their leader and
liberty her priestess.[17] Vera, you must not go!

VERA. If you wish it, I will stay. I would live a little longer for
freedom, a little longer for Russia.

ALEX. When you die then Russia is smitten indeed; when you die then I
shall lose all hope--all.... Vera, this is fearful news you
bring--martial law--it is too terrible. I knew it not, by my soul, I
knew it not!

VERA. How could you have known it? It is too well laid a plot for that.
This great White Czar, whose hands are red with the blood of the people
he has murdered, whose soul is black with his iniquity, is the cleverest
conspirator of us all. Oh, how could Russia bear two hearts like yours
and his!

ALEX. Vera, the Emperor was not always like this. There was a time when
he loved the people. It is that devil, whom God curse, Prince Paul
Maraloffski who has brought him to this. To-morrow, I swear it, I shall
plead for the people to the Emperor.

VERA. Plead to the Czar! Foolish boy, it is only those who are
sentenced to death that ever see our Czar. Besides, what should he care
for a voice that pleads for mercy? The cry of a strong nation in its
agony has not moved that heart of stone.

ALEX. (_aside_). Yet shall I plead to him. They can but kill me.

PROF. Here are the proclamations, Vera. Do you think they will do?

VERA. I shall read them. [18]How fair he looks?[18] Methinks he never
seemed so noble as to-night. Liberty is blessed in having such a lover.

ALEX. Well, President, what are you deep in?

MICH. We are thinking of the best way of killing bears. (_Whispers to
PRESIDENT and leads him aside._)

PROF. (_to VERA_). And the letters [19]from our brothers at Paris and
Berlin. What answer shall we send to them?[19]

VERA (_takes them mechanically_). Had I not strangled nature, sworn
neither to love nor be loved, methinks[20] I might have loved him. Oh, I
am a fool, a traitor myself, a traitor myself! But why did he come
amongst us with his bright[21] young face, his heart aflame for liberty,
his pure white soul? Why does he make me feel at times as if I would
have him as my king, Republican though I be? Oh, fool, fool, fool! False
to your oath! weak as water! Have done! Remember what you are--a
Nihilist, a Nihilist!

PRES. (_to MICHAEL_). But you will be seized, Michael.

MICH. I think not. I will wear the uniform of the Imperial Guard, and
the Colonel on duty is one of us. It is on the first floor, you
remember; so I can take a long shot.

PRES. Shall I tell the brethren?

[22]MICH. Not a word, not a word! There is a traitor amongst us.

VERA. Come, are these the proclamations? Yes, they will do; yes, they
will do. Send five hundred to Kiev and Odessa and Novgorod, five
hundred to Warsaw, and have twice the number distributed among the
Southern Provinces, though these dull Russian peasants care little for
our proclamations, and less for our martyrdoms. When the blow is struck,
it must be from the town, not from the country.

MICH. Ay, and by the sword not by the goose-quill.

VERA. Where are the letters from Poland?

PROF. Here.

VERA. Unhappy Poland! The eagles of Russia have fed on her heart. We
must not forget our brothers there.[22]

PRES. Is this true, Michael?

MICH. Ay, I stake my life on it.

PRES. [23]Let the doors be locked, then.[23] Alexis Ivanacievitch
entered on our roll of the brothers as a Student of the School of
Medicine at Moscow. Why did you not tell us of this bloody scheme[24] of
martial law?

ALEX. I, President?

MICH. Ay, you! You knew it, none better. Such weapons as these are not
forged in a day. Why did you not tell us of it? A week ago there had
been time [25]to lay the mine, to raise the barricade, to strike one
blow at least for liberty.[25] But now the hour is past. It is too late,
[26]it is too late![26] Why did you keep it a secret from us, I say?

ALEX. Now by the hand of freedom, Michael, my brother, you wrong me. I
knew nothing of this hideous law. By my soul, my brothers, I knew not of
it! How should I know?

MICH. Because you are a traitor! Where did you go when you left us the
night of our last meeting here?

[27]ALEX. To mine own house, Michael.[27]

MICH. Liar! I was on your track. You left here an hour after midnight.
Wrapped in a large cloak, you crossed the river in a boat a mile below
the second bridge, and gave the ferryman a gold piece, you, the poor
student of medicine! You doubled back twice, and hid in an archway so
long that I had almost made up my mind to stab you at once, only that I
am fond of hunting. So! you thought that you had baffled all pursuit,
did you? Fool! I am a bloodhound that never loses the scent. I followed
you from street to street. At last I saw you pass swiftly across the
Place St. Isaac, whisper to the guards the secret password, enter the
palace by a private door with your own key.

CONSPIRATORS. The palace!

VERA. Alexis!

MICH. I waited. All through the dreary watches of our long Russian night
I waited, that I might kill you with your Judas hire still hot in your
hand. But you never came out; you never left that palace at all. I saw
the blood-red sun rise through the yellow fog over the murky town; I saw
a new day of oppression dawn on Russia; but you never came out. So you
pass nights in the palace, do you? You know the password for the guards!
you have a key to a secret door. Oh, you are a spy--you are a spy! I
never trusted you, [28]with your soft white hands, your curled hair,
your pretty graces.[28] You have no mark of suffering about you; you
cannot be of the people. You are a spy--[29]a spy--traitor.[29]

OMNES. Kill him! Kill him! (_draw their knives_.)

VERA (_rushing in front of ALEXIS_). Stand back, I say, Michael! Stand
back all! [30]Do not dare[30] lay a hand upon him! He is the noblest
heart amongst us.

OMNES. Kill him! Kill him! He is a spy!

VERA. Dare to lay a finger on him, and I leave you all to yourselves.

PRES. Vera, did you not hear what Michael said of him? He stayed all
night in the Czar's palace. He has a password and a private key. What
else should he be but a spy?

VERA. Bah! I do not believe Michael. It is a lie! It is[31] a lie!
Alexis, say it is a lie!

ALEX. It is true. Michael has told what he saw. I did pass that night in
the Czar's palace. Michael has spoken the truth.

VERA. Stand back, I say; stand back! Alexis, I do not care. I trust you;
you would not betray us; you would not sell the people for money. You
are honest, true! Oh, say you are no spy!

ALEX. Spy? You know I am not. I am with you, my brothers, to the death.

MICH. Ay, to your own death.

ALEX. Vera, you[32] know I am true.

VERA. I know it well.

PRES. Why are you here, traitor?

ALEX. Because I love the people.

MICH. Then you can be a martyr for them?

VERA. You must kill me first, Michael, before you lay a finger on him.

PRES. Michael, we dare not lose Vera. It is her whim to let this boy
live. We can keep him here to-night. Up to this he has not betrayed us.

(_Tramp of soldiers outside, knocking at door._)[33]

VOICE. Open in the name of the Emperor!

MICH. He _has_ betrayed us. This is your doing, spy!

PRES. Come, Michael, come. We have no time to cut one another's throats
while we have our own heads to save.

VOICE. Open in the name of the Emperor!

PRES. Brothers, be masked all of you. [34]Michael, open the door. It is
our only chance.[34]

(_Enter GENERAL KOTEMKIN and soldiers._)

GEN. All honest citizens should be in their own houses at an hour before
midnight, and not more than five people have a right to meet privately.
Have you not noticed the proclamation, fellows?

MICH. Ay, you have spoiled every honest[35] wall in Moscow with it.

VERA. Peace, Michael, peace. Nay, Sir, we knew it not. We are a company
of strolling players travelling from Samara to Moscow to amuse His
Imperial Majesty the Czar.

GEN. But I heard loud voices before I entered. What was that?

VERA. We were rehearsing a new tragedy.

GEN. Your answers are too _honest_ to be true. Come, let me see who you
are. Take off those players' masks. By St. Nicholas, my beauty, if your
face matches your figure, you must be a choice morsel! Come, I say,
pretty one; I would sooner see your face than those of all the others.

PRES. O God! if he sees it is Vera, we are all lost!

GEN. No coquetting, my girl. Come, unmask, I say, or I shall tell my
guards to do it for you.

ALEX. Stand back, I say, General Kotemkin!

GEN. Who are you, fellow, that talk with such a tripping tongue to your
betters? (_ALEXIS takes his mask off_.) His Imperial Highness the
Czarevitch!

OMNES. The Czarevitch! [36]It is all over![36]

[37]PRES. He will give us up to the soldiers.[37]

MICH. (_to VERA_). Why did you not let me kill him? Come, we must fight
to the death for it.

VERA. Peace! he will not betray us.

ALEX. A whim of mine, General! You know how my father keeps me from the
world and imprisons me in the palace. I should really be bored to death
if I could not get out at night in disguise sometimes, and have some
romantic adventure in town. I fell in with these honest folks a few
hours ago.

GEN. But, your Highness--

ALEX. Oh, they are excellent actors, I assure you. If you had come in
ten minutes ago, you would have witnessed a most interesting scene.

GEN. Actors, are they, Prince?

ALEX. Ay, and very ambitious actors, too. They only care to play before
kings.

GEN. I' faith, your Highness, I was in hopes I had made a good haul of
Nihilists.[38]

ALEX. Nihilists in Moscow, General! with you as head of the police?
Impossible!

GEN. So I always tell your Imperial father. But I heard at the council
to-day that that woman Vera Sabouroff, the head of them, had been seen
in this very city. The Emperor's face turned as white as the snow
outside. I think I never saw such terror in any man before.

ALEX. She is a dangerous woman, then, this Vera Sabouroff?

GEN. The most dangerous in all Europe.

ALEX. Did you ever see her, General?

GEN. Why, five years ago, when I was a plain Colonel, I remember her,
your Highness, a common waiting girl in an inn. If I had known then what
she was going to turn out, I would have flogged her to death on the
roadside. She is not a woman at all; she is a sort of devil! For the
last eighteen months I have been hunting her, and caught sight of her
once last September outside Odessa.

ALEX. How did you let her go, General?

GEN. I was by myself, and she shot one of my horses just as I was
gaining on her. If I see her again I shan't miss my chance. The Emperor
has put twenty thousand roubles on her head.

ALEX. I hope you will get it, General; but meanwhile you are frightening
these honest people out of their wits, and disturbing the tragedy. Good
night, General.

GEN. Yes; but I should like to see their faces, your Highness.

ALEX. No, General; you must not ask that; you know how these gipsies
hate to be stared at.

GEN. Yes. But, your Highness--

ALEX. (_haughtily_). General, they are my friends, that is enough. And,
General, not a word of this little adventure here, you understand. I
shall rely on you.

GEN. I shall not forget, Prince. But shall we not see you back to the
palace? The State ball is almost over and you are expected.

ALEX. I shall be there; but I shall return alone. Remember, not a word
about my strolling players.

GEN. Or your pretty gipsy, eh, Prince? your pretty gipsy! I' faith, I
should like to see her before I go; she has such fine eyes through her
mask. Well, good night, your Highness; good night.

ALEX. Good night, General.

(_Exit GENERAL and the soldiers._)

VERA (_throwing off her mask_). Saved! and by you!

ALEX. (_clasping her hand_). Brothers, you trust me now?

SCENE.--_Council Chamber in the Emperor's Palace, hung with yellow
tapestry. Table, with chair of State, set for the Czar; window behind,
opening on to a balcony. As the scene progresses the light outside gets
darker._

_Present._--PRINCE PAUL MARALOFFSKI, PRINCE PETROVITCH, COUNT ROUVALOFF,
BARON RAFF, COUNT PETOUCHOF.


PRINCE PETRO. So our young scatter-brained Czarevitch has been forgiven
at last, and is to take his seat here again.

PRINCE PAUL. Yes; if that is not meant as an extra punishment. For my
own part, at least, I find these Cabinet Councils extremely exhausting.

PRINCE PETRO. Naturally; you are always speaking.

PRINCE PAUL. No; I think it must be that I have to listen sometimes.

COUNT R. Still, anything is better than being kept in a sort of prison,
like he was--never allowed to go out into the world.

PRINCE PAUL. My dear Count, for romantic young people like he is, the
world always looks best at a distance; and a prison where one's allowed
to order one's own dinner is not at all a bad place. (_Enter the
CZAREVITCH. The courtiers rise._) Ah! good afternoon, Prince. Your
Highness is looking a little pale to-day.

CZARE. (_slowly, after a pause_). I want change of air.

PRINCE PAUL (_smiling_). A most revolutionary sentiment! Your Imperial
father would highly disapprove of any reforms with the thermometer in
Russia.

CZARE. (_bitterly_). My Imperial father had kept me for six months in
this dungeon of a palace. This morning he has me suddenly woke up to see
some wretched Nihilists hung; it sickened me, the bloody butchery,
though it was a noble thing to see how well these men can die.

PRINCE PAUL. When you are as old as I am, Prince, you will understand
that there are few things easier than to live badly and to die well.

CZARE. Easy to die well! A lesson experience cannot have taught you,
whatever you may know of a bad life.

PRINCE PAUL (_shrugging his shoulders_). Experience, the name men give
to their mistakes. I never commit any.

CZARE. (_bitterly_). No; crimes are more in your line.

PRINCE PETRO. (_to the CZAREVITCH_). The Emperor was a good deal
agitated about your late appearance at the ball last night, Prince.

[1]COUNT R. (_laughing_). I believe he thought the Nihilists had broken
into the palace and carried you off.

BARON RAFF. If they had you would have missed a charming dance.[1]

PRINCE PAUL. And[2] an excellent supper. Gringoire really excelled
himself in his salad. Ah! you may laugh, Baron; but to make a good salad
is a much more difficult thing than cooking accounts. To make a good
salad is to be a brilliant diplomatist--the problem is so entirely the
same in both cases. To know exactly how much oil one must put with one's
vinegar.

BARON RAFF. A cook and a diplomatist! an excellent parallel. If I had a
son who was a fool I'd make him one or the other.

PRINCE PAUL. I see your father did not hold the same opinion, Baron.
But, believe me, you are wrong to run down cookery. For myself, the only
immortality I desire is to invent a new sauce. I have never had time
enough to think seriously about it, but I feel it is in me, I feel it is
in me.

CZARE. You have certainly missed your _metier_,[3] Prince Paul; the
_cordon bleu_ would have suited you much better than the Grand Cross of
Honour. But you know you could never have worn your white apron well;
you would have soiled it too soon, your hands are not clean enough.

PRINCE PAUL (_bowing_). Que voulez vous? I manage your father's
business.

CZARE. (_bitterly_). You mismanage my father's business, you mean! Evil
genius of his life that you are! before you came there was some love
left in him. It is you who have embittered his nature, poured into his
ear the poison of treacherous counsel, made him hated by the whole
people, made him what he is--a tyrant!

(_The courtiers look significantly at each other._)

PRINCE PAUL (_calmly_). I see your Highness does want change of air. But
I have been an eldest son myself. (_Lights a cigarette._) I know what it
is when a father won't die to please one.

(_The CZAREVITCH goes to the top of the stage, and leans against the
window, looking out._)

PRINCE PETRO. (_to BARON RAFF_). Foolish boy! [4]He will be sent into
exile, or worse, if he is not careful.[4]

BARON RAFF. Yes.[5] What a mistake it is to be sincere!

PRINCE PETRO. The only folly you have never committed, Baron.

BARON RAFF. One has only one head, you know, Prince.

PRINCE PAUL. My dear Baron, your head is the last thing any one would
wish to take from you. (_Pulls out snuffbox and offers it to PRINCE
PETROVITCH._)

PRINCE PETRO. Thanks, Prince! Thanks!

PRINCE PAUL. Very delicate, isn't it? I get it direct from Paris. But
under this vulgar Republic everything has degenerated over there.
"Cotelettes à l'impériale" vanished, of course, with the Bourbon, and
omelettes went out with the Orleanists. La belle France is entirely
ruined, Prince, through bad morals and worse cookery. (_Enter the
MARQUIS DE POIVRARD._) Ah! Marquis. I trust Madame la Marquise is well.

MARQUIS DE P. You ought to know better than I do, Prince Paul; you see
more _of_ her.

PRINCE PAUL (_bowing_). Perhaps I see more _in_ her, Marquis. Your wife
is really a charming woman, so full of _esprit_, and so satirical too;
she talks continually of you when we are together.

PRINCE PETRO. (_looking at the clock_). His Majesty is a little late
to-day, is he not?

PRINCE PAUL. What has happened to you, my dear Petrovitch? you seem
quite out of sorts. You haven't quarrelled with your cook, I hope? What
a tragedy that would be for you; you would lose all your friends.

PRINCE PETRO. I fear I wouldn't be so fortunate as that. You forget I
would still have my purse.[6] But you are wrong for once; my chef and I
are on excellent[7] terms.

PRINCE PAUL. Then your creditors or Mademoiselle Vera Sabouroff have
been writing to you? I find both of them such excellent correspondents.
But really you needn't be alarmed. I find the most violent proclamations
from the Executive Committee, as they call it, left all over my house. I
never read them; they are so badly spelt as a rule.

PRINCE PETRO. Wrong again, Prince; the Nihilists leave me alone for some
reason or other.

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). Ah! true. I forgot. Indifference is the revenge
the world takes on mediocrities.

PRINCE PETRO. I am bored with life,[8] Prince. Since the opera season
ended I have been a perpetual martyr to ennui.

PRINCE PAUL. The maladie du siècle! You want a new excitement, Prince.
Let me see--you have been married twice already; suppose you
try--falling in love, for once.

BARON R. Prince, I have been thinking a good deal lately--

PRINCE PAUL (_interrupting_). You surprise me very much, Baron.

BARON R. I cannot understand your nature.

PRINCE PAUL (_smiling_). If my nature had been made to suit your
comprehension rather than my own requirements, I am afraid I would have
made a very poor figure in the world.

COUNT R. There seems to be nothing in life about which you would not
jest.

PRINCE PAUL. Ah! my dear Count, life is much too important a thing ever
to talk seriously about it.

CZARE. (_coming back from the window_). I don't think Prince Paul's
nature is such a mystery. He would stab his best friend for the sake of
writing an epigram on his tombstone, or experiencing a new sensation.

PRINCE PAUL. Parbleu! I would sooner lose my best friend than my worst
enemy. To have friends, you know, one need only be good-natured; but
when a man has no enemy left there must be something mean about him.

CZARE. (_bitterly_). If to have enemies is a measure of greatness, then
you must be a Colossus, indeed, Prince.

PRINCE PAUL. Yes, I know I'm the most hated man in Russia, except your
father, [9]except your father, of course,[9] Prince. He doesn't seem to
like it much, by the way, but I do, I assure you. (_Bitterly._) I love
to drive through the streets and see how the canaille scowl at me from
every corner. It makes me feel I am a power in Russia; one man against a
hundred millions! Besides, I have no ambition to be a popular hero, to
be crowned with laurels one year and pelted with stones the next; I
prefer dying peaceably in my own bed.

CZARE. And after death?

PRINCE PAUL (_shrugging his shoulders_). Heaven is a despotism. I shall
be at home there.

CZARE. Do you never think of the people and their rights?

PRINCE PAUL. The people and their rights bore me. I am sick of both. In
these modern days to be vulgar, illiterate, common and vicious, seems to
give a man a marvellous infinity of rights that his honest fathers never
dreamed of. Believe me, Prince, in good democracy every man should be an
aristocrat; but these people in Russia who seek to thrust us out are no
better than the animals in one's preserves, and made to be shot at, most
of them.

CZARE. (_excitedly_). If they are[10] common, illiterate, vulgar, no
better than the beasts of the field, who made them so?

(_Enter AIDE-DE-CAMP._)

AIDE-DE-CAMP. His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor! (_PRINCE PAUL looks at
the CZAREVITCH, and smiles._)

(_Enter the CZAR, surrounded by his guard._)

CZARE. (_rushing forward to meet him_). Sire!

CZAR (_nervous and frightened_). Don't come too near me, boy! Don't come
too near me, I say! There is always something about an heir to a crown
unwholesome to his father. Who is that man over there? I don't know him.
What is he doing? Is he a conspirator? Have you searched him? Give him
till to-morrow to confess, then hang him!--hang him!

PRINCE PAUL. Sire, you are anticipating history. This is Count
Petouchof, your new ambassador to Berlin. He is come to kiss hands on
his appointment.

CZAR. To kiss my hand? There is some plot in it. He wants to poison me.
There, kiss my son's hand; it will do quite as well.

(_PRINCE PAUL signs to COUNT PETOUCHOF to leave the room. Exit PETOUCHOF
and the guards. CZAR sinks down into his chair. The courtiers remain
silent._)

PRINCE PAUL (_approaching_). Sire! will your Majesty--

CZAR. What do you startle me like that for? No, I won't. (_Watches the
courtiers nervously._) Why are you clattering your sword, sir? (_To
COUNT ROUVALOFF._) Take it off, I shall have no man wear a sword in my
presence (_looking at CZAREVITCH_), least of all my son. (_To PRINCE
PAUL._) You are not angry with me, Prince? You won't desert me, will
you? Say you won't desert me. What do you want? You can have
anything--anything.

PRINCE PAUL (_bowing very low_). Sire, 'tis enough for me to have your
confidence. (_Aside._) I was afraid he was going to revenge himself and
give me another decoration.

CZAR (_returning to his chair_). Well, gentlemen.

MARQ. DE POIV. Sire, I have the honour to present to you a loyal address
from your subjects in the Province of Archangel, expressing their horror
at the last attempt on your Majesty's life.

PRINCE PAUL. The last attempt but two, you ought to have said, Marquis.
Don't you see it is dated three weeks back?

CZAR. They are good people in the Province of Archangel--honest, loyal
people. They love me very much--simple, loyal people; give them a new
saint, it costs nothing. Well, Alexis (_turning to the CZAREVITCH_)--how
many traitors were hung this morning?

CZARE. There were three men strangled, Sire.

CZAR. There should have been three[11] thousand. I would to God that
this people had but one neck that I might strangle them with one noose!
Did they tell anything? whom did they implicate? what did they confess?

CZARE. Nothing, Sire.

CZAR. They should have been tortured then; why weren't they tortured?
Must I always be fighting in the dark? Am I never to know from what root
these traitors spring?

CZARE. What root should there be of discontent among the people but
tyranny and injustice amongst their rulers?

CZAR. What did you say, boy? tyranny! tyranny! Am I a tyrant? I'm not. I
love the people. I'm their father. I'm called so in every official
proclamation. Have a care, boy; have a care. You don't seem to be cured
yet of your foolish tongue. (_Goes over to PRINCE PAUL, and puts his
hand on his shoulder._) Prince Paul, tell me were there many people
there this morning to see the Nihilists hung?

PRINCE PAUL. Hanging is of course a good deal less of a novelty in
Russia now, Sire, than it was three or four years ago; and you know how
easily the people get tired even of their best amusements. But the
square and the tops of the houses were really quite crowded, were they
not, Prince? (_To the CZAREVITCH who takes no notice._)

CZAR. That's right; all loyal citizens should be there. It shows them
what to look forward to. Did you arrest any one in the crowd?

PRINCE PAUL. Yes, Sire, a woman for cursing your name. (_The CZAREVITCH
starts anxiously._) She was the mother of the two criminals.

CZAR (_looking at CZAREVITCH_). She should have blessed me for having
rid her of her children. Send her to prison.

CZARE. The prisons of Russia are too full already, Sire. There is no
room in them for any more victims.

[12]CZAR. They don't die fast enough, then. You should put more of them
into one cell at once. You don't keep them long enough in the mines. If
you do they're sure to die; but you're all too merciful. I'm too
merciful myself. Send her to Siberia.[12] She is sure to die on the way.
(_Enter an AIDE-DE-CAMP._) Who's that? Who's that?

AIDE-DE-CAMP. A letter for his Imperial Majesty.

CZAR (_to PRINCE PAUL_). I won't open it. There may be something in it.

PRINCE PAUL. It would be a very disappointing letter, Sire, if there
wasn't. (_Takes letter himself, and reads it._)

PRINCE PETRO. (_to COUNT ROUVALOFF_). It must be some sad news. I know
that smile too well.

PRINCE PAUL. From the Chief of the Police at Archangel, Sire. "The
Governor of the province was shot this morning by a woman as he was
entering the courtyard of his own house. The assassin has been seized."

CZAR. I never trusted the people of Archangel. It's a nest of Nihilists
and conspirators. Take away their saints; they don't deserve them.

PRINCE PAUL. Your Highness would punish them more severely by giving
them an extra one. Three governors shot in two months. (_Smiles to
himself._) Sire, permit me to recommend your loyal subject, the Marquis
de Poivrard, as the new governor of your Province of Archangel.

MARQ. DE POIV. (_hurriedly_). Sire, I am unfit for this post.

PRINCE PAUL. Marquis, you are too modest. Believe me, there is no man
in Russia I would sooner see Governor of Archangel than yourself.
(_Whispers to CZAR._)

CZAR. Quite right, Prince Paul; you are always right. See that the
Marquis's letters are made out at once.

PRINCE PAUL. He can start to-night, Sire. I shall really miss you very
much, Marquis. I always liked your taste in wines and wives extremely.

MARQ. DE POIV. (_to the CZAR_). Start to-night, Sire? (_PRINCE PAUL
whispers to the CZAR._)

CZAR. Yes, Marquis, to-night; it is better to go at once.

PRINCE PAUL. I shall see that Madame la Marquise is not too lonely while
you are away; so you need not be alarmed for her.

COUNT R. (_to PRINCE PETROVITCH_). I should be more alarmed for myself.

CZAR. The Governor of Archangel shot in his own courtyard by a woman!
I'm not safe here. I'm not safe anywhere, with that she devil of the
revolution, Vera Sabouroff, here in Moscow. Prince Paul, is that woman
still here?

PRINCE PAUL. They tell me she was at the Grand Duke's ball last night. I
can hardly believe that; but she certainly had intended to leave for
Novgorod to-day, Sire. The police were watching every train for her;
but, for some reason or other, she did not go. Some traitor must have
warned her. But I shall catch her yet. A chase after a beautiful woman
is always exciting.

CZAR. You must hunt her down with bloodhounds, and when she is taken I
shall hew her limb from limb. I shall stretch her on the rack till her
pale white body is twisted and curled like paper in the fire.

PRINCE PAUL. Oh, we shall have another hunt immediately for her, Sire!
Prince Alexis will assist us, I am sure.

CZARE. You never require any assistance to ruin a woman, Prince Paul.

CZAR. Vera, the Nihilist, in Moscow! O God,[13] were it not better to
die at once the dog's death they plot for me than to live as I live now!
Never to sleep, or, if I do, to dream such horrid dreams that Hell
itself were peace when matched with them. To trust none but those I have
bought, to buy none worth trusting! To see a traitor in every smile,
poison in every dish, a dagger in every hand! To lie awake at night,
listening from hour to hour for the stealthy creeping of the murderer,
for the laying of the damned mine! You are all spies! you are all spies!
You worst of all--you, my own son! Which of you is it who hides these
bloody proclamations under my own pillow, or at the table where I sit?
Which of ye all is the Judas who betrays me? O God! O God! methinks
there was a time once, in our war with England, when nothing could make
me afraid. (_This with more calm and pathos._) I have ridden into the
crimson heart of war, and borne back an eagle which those wild islanders
had taken from us. Men said I was brave then. My father gave me the Iron
Cross of valour. Oh, could he see me now with this coward's livery ever
in my cheek! (_Sinks into his chair._) I never knew any love when I was
a boy. I was ruled by terror myself, how else should I rule now?
(_Starts up._) But I will have revenge; I will have revenge. For every
hour I have lain awake at night, waiting for the noose or the dagger,
they shall pass years in Siberia, centuries in the mines! Ay! I shall
have revenge.

CZARE. Father! have mercy on the people. Give them what they ask.

PRINCE PAUL. And begin, Sire, with your own head; they have a particular
liking for that.

CZAR. The people! the people! A tiger which I have let loose upon
myself; but I will fight with it to the death. [14]I am done with half
measures.[14] I shall crush these Nihilists at a blow. There shall not
be a man of them, ay, or a woman either, left alive in Russia. [15]Am I
Emperor for[15] nothing, that a woman should hold me at bay? Vera
Sabouroff shall be in my power, I swear it, before a week is ended,
[16]though I burn my whole city to find her.[16] She shall be flogged by
the knout, stifled in the fortress, strangled in the square!

CZARE. O God!

CZAR. For two years her hands have been clutching at my throat; for two
years she has made my life a hell; but I shall have revenge. Martial
law, Prince, martial law over the whole Empire; that will give me
revenge. A good measure, Prince, eh? a good measure.

PRINCE PAUL. And an economical one too, Sire. It would carry off your
surplus population in six months, and save you many expenses in courts
of justice; they will not be needed now.

CZAR. Quite right. There are too many people in Russia, too much money
spent on them, too much money in courts of justice. I'll shut them up.

CZARE. Sire, reflect before--

CZAR. When can you have the proclamations ready, Prince Paul?

PRINCE PAUL. They have been printed for the last six months, Sire. I
knew you would need them.

CZAR. That's good! That's very good! Let us begin at once. Ah, Prince,
if every king in Europe had a minister like you--

CZARE. There would be less kings in Europe than there are.

CZAR (_in frightened whisper, to PRINCE PAUL_). What does he mean? Do
you trust him? His prison hasn't cured him yet. Shall I banish him?
Shall I (_whispers_)...? The Emperor Paul did it. The Empress Catherine
there[17] (_points to picture on the wall_) did it. Why shouldn't I?

PRINCE PAUL. Your Majesty, there is no need for alarm. The Prince is a
very ingenuous young man. He pretends to be devoted to the people, and
lives in a palace; preaches socialism, and draws a salary that would
support a province. He'll find out one day that the best cure for
Republicanism is the Imperial crown, and will cut up the "bonnet rogue"
of Democracy to make decorations for his Prime Minister.

CZAR. You are right. If he really loved the people, he could not be my
son.

PRINCE PAUL. If he lived with the people for a fortnight, their bad
dinners would soon cure him of his democracy. Shall we begin, Sire?

CZAR. At once. Read the proclamation. Gentlemen, be seated. Alexis,
Alexis, I say, come and hear it! It will be good practice for you; you
will be doing it yourself some day.

CZARE. I have heard too much of it already. (_Takes his seat at the
table. COUNT ROUVALOFF whispers to him._)

CZAR. What are you whispering about there, Count Rouvaloff?

COUNT R. I was giving his Royal Highness some good advice, your Majesty.

PRINCE PAUL. Count Rouvaloff is the typical spendthrift, Sire; he is
always giving away what he needs most. (_Lays papers before the CZAR._)
I think, Sire, you will approve of this:--"Love of the people," "Father
of his people," "Martial law," and the usual allusions to Providence in
the last line. All it requires now is your Imperial Majesty's signature.

CZARE. Sire!

PRINCE PAUL (_hurriedly_). I promise your Majesty to crush every
Nihilist in Russia in six months if you sign this proclamation; every
Nihilist in Russia.

CZAR. Say that again! To crush every Nihilist in Russia; to crush this
woman, their leader, who makes war upon me in my own city. Prince Paul
Maraloffski, I create you Marechale of the whole Russian Empire to help
you to carry out martial law.

CZAR. Give me the proclamation. I will sign it at once.

PRINCE PAUL (_points on paper_). Here, Sire.

CZARE. (_starts up and puts his hands on the paper_). Stay! I tell you,
stay! The priests have taken heaven from the people, and you would take
the earth away too.

PRINCE PAUL. We have no time, Prince, now. This boy will ruin
everything. The pen, Sire.

CZARE. What! is it so small a thing to strangle a nation, to murder a
kingdom, to wreck an empire? Who are we who dare lay this ban of terror
on a people? Have we less vices than they have, that we bring them to
the bar of judgment before us?

PRINCE PAUL. What a Communist the Prince is! He would have an equal
distribution of sin as well as of property.

CZARE. Warmed by the same sun, nurtured by the same air, fashioned of
flesh and blood like to our own, wherein are they different to us, save
that they starve while we surfeit, that they toil while we idle, that
they sicken while we poison, that they die while we strangle?

CZAR. How dare--?

CZARE. I dare all for the people; but you would rob them of common
rights of common men.

CZAR. The people have no rights.

CZARE. Then they have great wrongs. Father, they have won your battles
for you; from the pine forests of the Baltic to the palms of India they
have ridden on victory's mighty wings in search of your glory! Boy as I
am in years, I have seen wave after wave of living men sweep up the
heights of battle to their death; ay, and snatch perilous conquest from
the scales of war when the bloody crescent seemed to shake above our
eagles.

CZAR (_somewhat moved_). Those men are dead. What have I to do with
them?

CZARE. Nothing! The dead are safe; you[18] cannot harm them now. They
sleep their last long sleep. Some in Turkish waters, others by the
windswept heights of Norway and the Dane! But these, the living, our
brothers, what have you done for them? They asked you for bread, you
gave them a stone. They sought for freedom, you scourged them with
scorpions. You have sown the seeds of this revolution yourself!--

PRINCE PAUL. And are we not cutting down the harvest?

CZARE. Oh, my brothers! better far that ye had died in the iron hail and
screaming shell of battle than to come back to such a doom as[19] this!
The beasts of the forests have their lairs, and the wild beasts their
caverns, but the people of Russia, conquerors of the world, have not
where to lay their heads.

PRINCE PAUL. They have the headsman's block.

CZARE. The headsman's block! Ay! you have killed their souls at your
pleasure, you would kill their bodies now.

CZAR. Insolent boy! Have you forgotten who is Emperor of Russia?

CZARE. No! The people reign now, by the grace of God.[20] You should
have been their shepherd; you have fled away like the hireling, and let
the wolves in upon them.

CZAR. Take him away! Take him away, Prince Paul!

CZARE. God hath given this people tongues to speak with; you would cut
them out that they may be dumb in their agony, silent in their torture!
But God hath given them hands to smite with, and they shall smite! Ay!
from the sick and labouring womb of this unhappy land some revolution,
like a bloody child, shall[21] rise up and slay you.

CZAR (_leaping up_). Devil! Assassin! Why do you beard me thus to my
face?

CZARE. Because I[22] am a Nihilist! (_The ministers start to their feet;
there is dead silence for a few minutes._)

CZAR. A Nihilist! a Nihilist! Scorpion whom I have nurtured, traitor
whom I have fondled, is this your bloody secret? Prince Paul
Maraloffski, Marechale of the Russian Empire, arrest the Czarevitch!

MINISTERS. Arrest the Czarevitch!

CZAR. A Nihilist! If you have sown with them, you shall reap with them!
If you have talked with them, you shall rot with them! If you have lived
with them, with them you shall die!

PRINCE PETRO. Die!

CZAR. A plague on all sons, I say! There should be no more marriages in
Russia when one can breed such vipers as you are! Arrest the Czarevitch,
I say!

PRINCE PAUL. Czarevitch! by order of the Emperor, I demand your sword.
(_CZAREVITCH gives up sword; PRINCE PAUL places it on the table._)
Foolish boy! you are not made for a conspirator; you have not learned to
hold your tongue. Heroics are out of place in a palace.

CZAR (_sinks into his chair with his eyes fixed on the CZAREVITCH_). O
God!

CZARE. If I am to die for the people, I am ready; one Nihilist more or
less in Russia, what does that matter?

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). A good deal I should say to the one Nihilist.

[23]CZARE. The mighty brotherhood to which I belong has a thousand such
as I am, ten thousand better still! (_The CZAR starts in his seat._) The
star of freedom is risen already, and far off I hear the mighty wave
democracy break on these cursed shores.[23]

PRINCE PAUL (_to PRINCE PETROVITCH_). In that case you and I had better
learn how to swim.

CZARE. Father, Emperor, Imperial Master, I plead not for my own life,
but for the lives of my brothers, the people.

PRINCE PAUL (_bitterly_). Your brothers, the people, Prince, are not
content with their own lives, they always want to take their neighbour's
too.

CZAR (_standing up_). I am sick of being afraid. I have done with terror
now. From this day I proclaim war against the people--war to their
annihilation. As they have dealt with me, so shall I deal with them. I
shall grind them to powder, and strew their dust upon the air. There
shall be a spy in every man's house, a traitor on every hearth, a
hangman in every village, a gibbet in every square. Plague, leprosy, or
fever shall be less deadly than my wrath; I will make every frontier a
grave-yard, every province a lazar-house, and cure the sick by the
sword. I shall have peace in Russia, though it be the peace of the dead.
Who said I was a coward? Who said I was afraid? See, thus shall I crush
this people beneath my feet! (_Takes up sword of CZAREVITCH off table
and tramples on it._)

CZARE. Father, beware, the sword you tread on may turn and wound you.
The people suffer long, but vengeance comes at last, vengeance with red
hands and bloody purpose.

PRINCE PAUL. Bah! the people are bad shots; they always miss one.

CZARE. There are times when the people are instruments of God.

CZAR. Ay! and when kings are God's scourges for the people. Oh, my own
son, in my own house! My own flesh and blood against me! Take him away!
Take him away! Bring in my guards. (_Enter the Imperial Guard. CZAR
points to CZAREVITCH, who stands alone at the side of the stage._) To
the blackest prison in Moscow! Let me never see his face again.
(_CZAREVITCH is being led out._) No, no, leave him! I don't trust
guards. They are all Nihilists! They would let him escape and he would
kill me, kill me! No, I'll bring him to prison myself, you and I (_to
PRINCE PAUL_). I trust you, you have no mercy. I shall have no mercy.
Oh, my own son against me! How hot it is! The air stifles me! I feel as
if I were going to faint, as if something were at my throat. Open the
windows, I say! Out of my sight! Out of my sight! I can't bear his eyes.
Wait, wait for me. (_Throws window open and goes out on balcony._)

PRINCE PAUL (_looking at his watch_). The dinner is sure to be spoiled.
How annoying politics are and eldest sons!

VOICE (_outside, in the street_). God save the people! (_CZAR is shot,
and staggers back into the room._)

CZARE. (_breaking from the guards, and rushing over_). Father!

CZAR. Murderer! Murderer! You did it! Murderer! (_Dies._)


TABLEAU.


END OF ACT II.




ACT III.

_Same scene and business as Act I. Man in yellow dress, with drawn
sword, at the door._


_Password outside._ Væ tyrannis.

_Answer._ Væ victis (_repeated three times_).

(_Enter CONSPIRATORS, who form a semicircle, masked and cloaked._)

PRESIDENT. What hour is it?

FIRST CONSP. The hour to strike.

PRES. What day?

SECOND CONSP. The day of Marat.[1]

PRES. In what month?

SECOND CONSP. The month of liberty.

PRES. What is our duty?

FOURTH CONSP. To obey.

PRES. Our creed?

FIFTH CONSP. Parbleu, Mons. le President, I never knew you had one.

CONSPS. A spy! A spy! Unmask! Unmask! A spy!

PRES. [2]Let the doors be shut. There are others but Nihilists
present.[2]

CONSPS. Unmask! Unmask! [3]Kill him! kill him![3] (_Masked CONSPIRATOR
unmasks._) Prince Paul!

VERA. Devil! Who lured you into the lion's den?

CONSPS. Kill him! kill him![4]

PRINCE PAUL. En vérité, Messieurs, you are not over-hospitable in your
welcome.

VERA. Welcome! What welcome should we give you but the dagger or the
noose?

PRINCE PAUL. I had no idea, really, that the Nihilists were so
exclusive. Let me assure you that if I had not always had an _entree_
to the very best society, and the very worst conspiracies, I could never
have been Prime Minister in Russia.

VERA. The tiger cannot change its nature, nor the snake lose its venom;
but are you turned a lover of the people?

PRINCE PAUL. Mon Dieu, non, Mademoiselle! I would much sooner talk
scandal in a drawing-room than treason in a cellar. Besides, I hate the
common mob, who smell of garlic, smoke bad tobacco, get up early, and
dine off one dish.

PRES. What have you to gain, then, by a revolution?

PRINCE PAUL. Mon ami, I have nothing left to lose. That scatter-brained
boy, this new Czar, has banished me.

VERA. To Siberia?

PRINCE PAUL. No, to Paris. He has confiscated my estates, robbed me of
my office and my cook. I have nothing left but my decorations. I am here
for revenge.[5]

PRES. Then you have a right to be one of us. [5]We also meet daily for
revenge.[5]

PRINCE PAUL. You want money, of course. No one ever joins a conspiracy
who has any. Here. (_Throws money on table._) You have so many spies
that I should think you want information. Well, you will find me the
best informed man in Russia on the abuses of our Government. I made them
nearly all myself.

VERA. President, I don't trust this man. He has done us too much harm in
Russia to let him go in safety.

PRINCE PAUL. Believe me, Mademoiselle, you are wrong; I will be a most
valuable addition to your circle; as for you, gentlemen, if I had not
thought that you would be useful to me I shouldn't have risked my neck
among you, or dined an hour earlier than usual so as to be in time.

PRES. Ay, if he had wanted to spy on us, Vera, he wouldn't have come
himself.

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). No; I should have sent my best friend.

PRES. Besides, Vera, he is just the man to give us the information we
want about some business we have in hand to-night.

VERA. Be it so if you wish it.

PRES. Brothers, is it your will that Prince Paul Maraloffski be
admitted, and take the oath of the Nihilist?

CONSPS. It is! it is!

PRES. (_holding out dagger and a paper_). Prince Paul, the dagger or the
oath?

PRINCE PAUL (_smiles sardonically_). I would sooner annihilate than be
annihilated. (_Takes paper._)

PRES. Remember: [6]Betray us, and as long as the earth holds poison or
steel, as long as men can strike or woman betray, you shall not escape
vengeance.[6] The Nihilists never forget their friends, or forgive their
enemies.

PRINCE PAUL. Really? I did not think you were so civilized.

VERA (_pacing up and down_). Why is he not here? He will not keep the
crown. I know him well.

PRES. Sign. (_PRINCE PAUL signs_.) You said you thought we had no creed.
You were wrong. Read it!

VERA. This is a dangerous thing, President. What can we do with this
man?

PRES. We can use him.

VERA. And afterwards?

PRES. (_shrugging his shoulders_). Strangle him.

PRINCE PAUL (_reading_). "The rights of humanity!" In the old times men
carried out their rights for themselves as they lived, but nowadays
every baby seems born with a social manifesto in its mouth much bigger
than itself.[7] "Nature is not a temple, but a workshop: we demand the
right to labour." Ah, I shall surrender my own rights in that respect.

VERA (_pacing up and down behind_). Oh, will he never come? will he
never come?

PRINCE PAUL. "The family as subversive of true socialistic and communal
unity is to be annihilated." Yes, President, I agree completely with
Article 5. A family is a terrible incumbrance, especially when one is
not married. (_Three knocks at the door._)

VERA. Alexis at last!

_Password._ Væ tyrannis!

_Answer._ Væ victis!

(_Enter MICHAEL STROGANOFF._)

PRES.[8] Michael, the regicide! Brothers, let us do honour to a man who
has killed a king.

[9]VERA (_aside_). Oh, he will come yet.[9]

PRES. Michael, you have saved Russia.

MICH. Ay, Russia was free for a moment [10]when the tyrant fell, but the
sun of liberty has set again like that false dawn which cheats our eyes
in autumn.

PRES. The dread night of tyranny is not yet past for Russia.

MICH. (_clutching his knife_).[10] One more blow, and the end is come
indeed.

VERA (_aside_). One more blow! What does he mean? Oh, impossible! but
why is he not with us? Alexis! Alexis! why are you not here?

PRES. But how did you escape, Michael? They said you had been seized.

MICH. I was dressed in the uniform of the Imperial Guard. The Colonel on
duty was a brother, and gave me the password. I drove through the troops
in safety with it, and, thanks to my good horse, reached the walls
before the gates were closed.

PRES. What a chance his coming out on the balcony was!

MICH. A chance? There is no such thing as chance. It was God's finger
led him there.

PRES. And where have you been these three days?

MICH. Hiding in the house of the priest Nicholas at the cross-roads.

PRES. Nicholas is an honest man.

MICH. Ay, honest enough for a priest. I am here now for vengeance on a
traitor!

VERA (_aside_). O God, will he never come? Alexis! why are you not here?
You cannot have turned traitor!

MICH. (_seeing PRINCE PAUL_). Prince Paul Maraloffski here! By St.
George, a lucky capture! This must have been Vera's doing. She is the
only one who could have lured that serpent into the trap.

PRES. Prince Paul has just taken the oath.

VERA. Alexis, the Czar, has banished him from Russia.

MICH. Bah! A blind to cheat us. We will keep Prince Paul here, [11]and
find some office for him in our reign of terror.[11] He is well
accustomed by this time to bloody work.

PRINCE PAUL (_approaching MICHAEL_). That was a long shot of yours, mon
camarade.

MICH. I have had a good deal of practice shooting, since I have been a
boy, off your Highness's wild boars.

PRINCE PAUL. Are my gamekeepers like moles, then, always asleep?

MICH. No, Prince. I am one of them; but, like you, I am fond of robbing
what I am put to watch.

PRES. This must be a new atmosphere for you, Prince Paul. We speak the
truth to one another here.

PRINCE PAUL. How misleading you must find it. You have an odd medley
here, President--a little rococo, I am afraid.

PRES. You recognise a good many friends, I dare say?

PRINCE PAUL. Yes, there is always more brass than brains in an
aristocracy.

PRES. But you are here yourself?

PRINCE PAUL. I? As I cannot be Prime Minister, I must be a Nihilist.
There is no alternative.

VERA. O God, will he never come? The hand is on the stroke of the hour.
Will he never come?

MICH. (_aside_). President, you know what we have to do? 'Tis but a
sorry hunter who leaves the wolf cub alive to avenge his father. How are
we to get at this boy? It must be to-night. To-morrow he will be
throwing some sop of reform to the people, and it will be too late for a
Republic.

PRINCE PAUL. You are quite right. Good kings are the enemies of
Democracy, and when he has begun by banishing me you may be sure he
intends to be a patriot.

MICH. I am sick of patriot kings; [12]what Russia needs is a
Republic.[12]

PRINCE PAUL. Messieurs, I have brought you two documents which I think
will interest you--the proclamation this young Czar intends publishing
to-morrow, and a plan of the Winter Palace, where he sleeps to-night.
(_Hands paper._)

VERA. [13]I dare not ask them what they are plotting about.[13] Oh, why
is Alexis not here?

PRES. Prince, this is most valuable information. Michael, you were
right. If it is not to-night it will be too late. Read that.

MICH. Ah! A loaf of bread flung to a starving nation. [14]A lie to cheat
the people.[14] (_Tears it up._) It must be to-night. I do not believe
in him. Would he have kept his crown had he loved the people? But how
are we to get at him?

PRINCE PAUL. The key of the private door in the street. (_Hands key._)

PRES. Prince, we are in your debt.

PRINCE PAUL (_smiling_). The normal condition of the Nihilists.

MICH. Ay, but we are paying our debts off with interest now. Two
Emperors in one week. That will make the balance straight. We would have
thrown in a Prime Minister if you had not come.

PRINCE PAUL. Ah, I am sorry you told me. It robs my visit of all its
picturesqueness and adventure. I thought I was perilling my head by
coming here, and you tell me I have saved it. One is sure to be
disappointed if one tries to get romance out of modern life.

MICH. It is not so romantic a thing to lose one's head, Prince Paul.

PRINCE PAUL. No, but it must often be very dull to keep it. Don't you
find that sometimes? (_Clock strikes six._)

VERA (_sinking into a seat_). Oh, it is past the hour! It is past the
hour!

MICH. (_to PRESIDENT_). Remember to-morrow will be too late.

PRES. Brothers, it is full time. Which of us is absent?

CONSPS. Alexis! Alexis!

PRES. Michael, read Rule 7.

MICH. "When any brother shall have disobeyed a summons to be present,
the President shall enquire if there is anything alleged against him."

PRES. Is there anything against our brother Alexis?

CONSPS. He wears a crown! He wears a crown!

PRES. Michael, read Article 7 of the Code of Revolution.

MICH. "Between the Nihilists and all men who wear crowns above their
fellows, there is war to the death."

PRES. Brothers, what say you? Is Alexis, the Czar, guilty or not?

OMNES. He is guilty!

PRES. What shall the penalty be?

OMNES. Death!

PRES. Let the lots be prepared; it shall be to-night.

PRINCE PAUL. Ah, this is really interesting! I was getting afraid
conspiracies were as dull as courts are.

PROF. MARFA. My forte is more in writing pamphlets than in taking shots.
Still a regicide has always a place in history.

MICH. If your pistol is as harmless as your pen, this young tyrant will
have a long life.

PRINCE PAUL. You ought to remember, too, Professor, that if you were
seized, as you probably would be, and hung, as you certainly would be,
there would be nobody left to read your own articles.

PRES. Brothers, are you ready?

VERA (_starting up_). Not yet! Not yet! I have a word to say.

MICH. (_aside_). [15]Plague take her! I knew it would come to this.[15]

VERA. This boy has been our brother. Night after night he has perilled
his own life to come here. [16]Night after night, when every street was
filled with spies, every house with traitors.[16] Delicately nurtured
like a king's son, he has dwelt among us.

PRES. Ay! under a false name. [17]He lied to us at the beginning. He
lies to us now at the end.[17]

VERA. I swear he is true. There is not a man here who does not owe him
his life a thousand times. When the bloodhounds were on us that night,
who saved us [18]from arrest, torture, flogging, death,[18] but he ye
seek to kill?--

MICH. To kill all tyrants is our mission!

VERA. He is no tyrant. I know him well! He loves the people.

PRES. We know him too; he is a traitor.

VERA. A traitor! Three days ago he could have betrayed every man of you
here, [19]and the gibbet would have been your doom.[19] He gave you all
your lives once. Give him a little time--a week, a month, a few days;
but not now!--O God,[20] not now!

CONSPS. (_brandishing daggers_). To-night! to-night! to-night!

VERA. Peace, you gorged adders; peace!

MICH. What, are we not here to annihilate? shall we not keep our oath?

VERA. Your oath! your oath! [21]Greedy that you are of gain, every man's
hand lusting for his neighbour's pelf, every heart set on pillage and
rapine;[21] who, of ye all, if the crown were set on his head, would
give an empire up for the mob to scramble for? The people are not yet
fit for a Republic in Russia.

PRES. Every nation is fit for a Republic.

MICH. The man is a tyrant.

VERA. A tyrant! Hath he not dismissed his evil counsellors. That
ill-omened raven of his father's life hath had his wings clipped and his
claws pared, and comes to us croaking for revenge. Oh, have mercy on
him![22] Give him a week to live!

PRES. Vera pleading for a king!

VERA (_proudly_). I plead not for a king, but for a brother.

MICH. For a traitor to his oath, for a coward who should have flung the
purple back to the fools that gave it to him. No, Vera, no. The brood of
men is not dead yet, nor the dull earth grown sick of child-bearing. No
crowned man in Russia shall pollute God's air by living.

PRES. You bade us try you once; we have tried you, and you are found
wanting.

MICH. Vera, I am not blind; I know your secret. You love this boy, this
young prince with his pretty face, his curled hair, his soft white
hands. Fool that you are, dupe of a lying tongue, do you know what he
would have done to you, this boy you think loved you? He would have made
you his mistress, used your body at his pleasure, thrown you away when
he was wearied of you; you, the priestess of liberty, the flame of
Revolution, the torch of democracy.

VERA. What he would have done to me matters little. To the people, at
least, he will be true. He loves the people--at least, he loves liberty.

PRES. So he would play the citizen-king, would he, while we starve?
[23]Would flatter us with sweet speeches, would cheat us with promises
like his father, would lie to us as his whole race have lied.[23]

MICH. And you whose very name made every despot tremble for his life,
you, Vera Sabouroff, you would betray liberty for a lover and the people
for a paramour!

CONSPS. [24]Traitress! Draw the lots; draw the lots![24]

VERA. In thy throat thou liest, Michael! I love him not. He loves me
not.

MICH. You love him not? Shall he not die then?

VERA (_with an effort, clenching her hands_). Ay, it is right that he
should die. He hath broken his oath. [25]There should be no crowned man
in Europe. Have I not sworn it? To be strong our new Republic should be
drunk with the blood of kings. He hath broken his oath. As the father
died so let the son die too.[25] Yet not to-night, not to-night. Russia,
that hath borne her centuries of wrong, can wait a week for liberty.
Give him a week.

PRES. We will have none of you! Begone from us to this boy you love.

MICH. Though I find him in your arms I shall kill him.

CONSPS. To-night! To-night! To-night!

MICH. (_holding up his hand_). A moment! I have something to say.
(_Approaches VERA; speaks very slowly._) Vera Sabouroff, have you
forgotten your brother? (_Pauses to see effect; VERA starts._) Have you
forgotten that young face, pale with famine; those young limbs twisted
with torture; the iron chains they made him walk in? What week of
liberty did they give him? What pity did they show him for a day? (_VERA
falls in a chair._) Oh! you could talk glibly enough then of vengeance,
glibly enough of liberty. When you said you would come to Moscow, your
old father caught you by the knees and begged you not to leave him
childless and alone.[26] I seem to hear his cries still ringing in my
ears, but you were as deaf to him as the rocks on the roadside; as chill
and cold as the snow on the hill. You left your father that night, and
three weeks after he died of a broken heart. You wrote to me to follow
you here. I did so; first because I loved you; but you soon cured me of
that; whatever gentle feeling, whatever pity, whatever humanity, was in
my heart you withered up and destroyed, as the canker worm eats the
corn, and the plague kills the child. You bade me cast out love from my
breast as a vile thing, you turned my hand to iron, and my heart to
stone; you told me to live for freedom and for revenge. I have done so;
but you, what have you done?

VERA. Let the lots be drawn! (_CONSPIRATORS applaud._)

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). Ah, the Grand Duke will come to the throne sooner
than he expected. He is sure to make a good king under my guidance. He
is so cruel to animals, and never keeps his word.

MICH. Now you are yourself at last, Vera.

VERA (_standing motionless in the middle_). The lots, I say, the lots!
I am no woman now. My blood seems turned to gall; my heart is as cold as
steel is; my hand shall be more deadly. From the desert and the tomb the
voice of my prisoned brother cries aloud, and bids me strike one blow
for liberty. The lots, I say, the lots!

PRES. Are you ready. Michael, you have the right to draw first; you are
a Regicide.

VERA. O God, into my hands! Into my hands! (_They draw the lots from a
bowl surmounted by a skull._)

PRES. Open your lots.

VERA (_opening her lot_). The lot is mine! see the bloody sign upon it!
Dmitri, my brother, you shall have your revenge now.

PRES. Vera Sabouroff, you are chosen to be a regicide. God has been good
to you. The dagger or the poison? (_Offers her dagger and vial._)

VERA. I can trust my hand better with the dagger; it never fails. (_Take
dagger._) I shall stab him to the heart, as he has stabbed me. Traitor,
to leave us for a ribbon, a gaud, a bauble, to lie to me every day he
came here, to forget us in an hour. [27]Michael was right, he loved me
not, nor the people either.[27] Methinks that if I was a mother and bore
a man-child I would poison my breast to him, lest he might grow to a
traitor or to a king. (_PRINCE PAUL whispers to the PRESIDENT._)

PRES. Ay, Prince Paul, that is the best way. Vera, the Czar[28] sleeps
to-night in his own room in the north wing of the palace. Here is the
key of the private door in the street. The passwords of the guards will
be given to you. His own servants will be drugged. You will find him
alone.

VERA. It is well. I shall not fail.

PRES. We will wait outside in the Place St. Isaac, under the window. As
the clock strikes twelve from the tower of St. Nicholas you will give us
the sign that the dog is dead.

VERA. And what shall the sign be?

PRES. You are to throw us out the bloody dagger.

MICH. Dripping with the traitor's life.

PRES. Else we shall know that you have been seized, and we will burst
our way in, drag you from his guards.

MICH. And kill him in the midst of them.

PRES. Michael, you will head us?

MICH. Ay, I shall head you. See that your hand fails not, Vera
Sabouroff.

[29]VERA. Fool, is it so hard a thing to kill one's enemy.[29]

PRINCE PAUL (_aside_). This is the ninth conspiracy I have been in in
Russia. They always end in a "voyage en Siberie" for my friends and a
new decoration for myself.

MICH. It is your last conspiracy, Prince.

PRES. At twelve o'clock, the bloody dagger.

VERA. Ay, red with the blood of that false heart. I shall not forget it.
(_Standing in the middle of the stage._) [30]To strangle whatever nature
is in me, neither to love nor to be loved, neither to pity nor to be
pitied. Ay! it is an oath, an oath. Methinks the spirit of Charlotte
Corday has entered my soul now. I shall carve my name on the world, and
be ranked among the great heroines. Ay! the spirit of Charlotte Corday
beats in each petty vein, and nerves my woman's hand to strike, as I
have nerved my woman's heart to hate. Though he laughs in his dreams, I
shall not falter. Though he sleep peacefully I shall not miss my
blow.[30] Be glad, my brother, in your stifled cell; be glad and laugh
to-night. To-night this new-fledged Czar shall post with bloody feet to
Hell, and greet his father there! [31]This Czar! O traitor, liar, false
to his oath, false to me! To play the patriot amongst us, and now to
wear a crown; to sell us, like Judas, for thirty silver pieces, to
betray us with a kiss![31] (_With more passion._) O Liberty, O mighty
mother of eternal time, thy robe is purple with the blood of those who
have died for thee! Thy throne is the Calvary of the people, thy crown
the crown of thorns. O crucified mother, the despot has driven a nail
through thy right hand, and the tyrant through thy left! Thy feet are
pierced with their iron. When thou wert athirst thou calledst on the
priests for water, and they gave thee bitter drink. They thrust a sword
into thy side. They mocked thee in thine agony of age on age. [32]Here,
on thy altar, O Liberty, do I dedicate myself to thy service; do with me
as thou wilt![32] (_Brandishing dagger._) The end has come now, and by
thy sacred wounds, O crucified mother, O Liberty, I swear that Russia
shall be saved!

ACT IV.

SCENE.--_Antechamber of the CZAR'S private room. Large window at the
back, with drawn curtains over it._

_Present._--PRINCE PETROVITCH, BARON RAFF, MARQUIS DE POIVRARD, COUNT
ROUVALOFF.


PRINCE PETRO. He is beginning well, this young Czar.

BARON RAFF (_shrugs his shoulders_). All young Czars do begin well.

COUNT R. And end badly.

[1]MARQ. DE POIV. Well, I have no right to complain. He has done me one
good service, at any rate.

PRINCE PETRO. Cancelled your appointment to Archangel, I suppose?

MARQ. DE POIV. Yes; my head wouldn't have been safe there for an
hour.[1]

(_Enter GENERAL KOTEMKIN._)

BARON RAFF. Ah! General, any more news of our romantic Emperor?

GEN. KOTEMK. You are quite right to call him romantic, Baron; a week ago
I found him amusing himself in a garret with a company of strolling
players; to-day his whim is all the convicts in Siberia are to be
recalled, and political prisoners, as he calls them, amnestied.

PRINCE PETRO. Political prisoners! Why, half of them are no better than
common murderers!

COUNT R. And the other half much worse?

BARON RAFF. Oh, you wrong them, surely, Count. Wholesale trade has
always been more respectable than retail.

COUNT R. But he is really too romantic. He objected yesterday to my
having the monopoly of the salt tax. He said the people had a right to
have cheap salt.

MARQ. DE POIV. Oh, that's nothing; but he actually disapproved of a
State banquet every night because there is a famine in the Southern
provinces. (_The young CZAR enters unobserved, and overhears the rest._)

PRINCE PETRO. Quelle bétise! The more starvation there is among the
people, the better. It teaches them self-denial, an excellent virtue,
Baron, an excellent virtue.

BARON RAFF. I have often heard so; I have often heard so.

GEN. KOTEMK. He talked of a Parliament, too, in Russia, and said the
people should have deputies to represent them.

BARON RAFF. As if there was not enough brawling in the streets already,
but we must give the people a room to do it in. But, Messieurs, the
worst is yet to come. He threatens a complete reform in the public
service on the ground that the people are too heavily taxed.

MARQ. DE POIV. He can't be serious there. What is the use of the people
except[2] to get money out of? But talking of taxes, my dear Baron, you
must really let me have forty thousand roubles to-morrow? my wife says
she must have a new diamond bracelet.

COUNT R. (_aside to BARON RAFF_). Ah, to match the one Prince Paul gave
her last week, I suppose.

PRINCE PETRO. I must have sixty thousand roubles at once, Baron. My son
is overwhelmed with debts of honour which he can't pay.

BARON RAFF. What an excellent son to imitate his father so carefully!

GEN. KOTEMK. You are always getting money. I never get a single kopeck I
have not got a right to. It's unbearable; it's ridiculous! My nephew is
going to be married. I must get his dowry for him.

PRINCE PETRO. My dear General, your nephew must be a perfect Turk. He
seems to get married three times a week regularly.

GEN. KOT. Well, he wants a dowry to console him.

COUNT R. I am sick of town. I want a house in the country.

MARQ. DE POIV. I am sick of the country. I want a house in town.

BARON RAFF. Mes amis, I am extremely sorry for you. It is out of the
question.

PRINCE PETRO. But my son, Baron?

GEN. KOTEMK. But my nephew?

MARQ. DE POIV. But my house in town?

COUNT R. But my house in the country?

MARQ. DE POIV. But my wife's diamond bracelet?

BARON RAFF. Gentlemen, impossible! The old _regime_ in Russia is dead;
the funeral begins to-day.

COUNT R. Then I shall wait for the resurrection.

PRINCE PETRO. Yes, but, _en attendant_, what are we to do?

BARON RAFF. What have we always done in Russia when a Czar suggests
reforms?--nothing. You forget we are diplomatists. Men of thought should
have nothing to do with action. Reforms in Russia are very tragic, but
they always end in a farce.

COUNT R. I wish Prince Paul were here. [3]By the bye, I think this boy
is rather ungrateful to him. If that clever old Prince had not
proclaimed him Emperor at once without giving him time to think about
it, he would have given up his crown, I believe, to the first cobbler he
met in the street.

PRINCE PETRO. But do you think, Baron, that Prince Paul is really
going?[3]

BARON RAFF. He is exiled.

PRINCE PETRO. Yes; but is he going?

BARON RAFF. I am sure of it; at least he told me he had sent two
telegrams already to Paris about his dinner.

COUNT R. Ah! that settles the matter.

CZAR (_coming forward_). Prince Paul better send a third telegram and
order (_counting them_) six extra places.

BARON RAFF. The devil!

CZAR. No, Baron, the Czar. Traitors! There would be no bad kings in the
world if there were no bad ministers like you. It is men such as you who
wreck mighty empires on the rock of their own greatness. Our mother,
Russia, hath no need of such unnatural sons. You can make no atonement
now; it is too late for that. The grave cannot give back your dead, nor
the gibbet your martyrs, but I shall be more merciful to you. I give you
your lives! That is the curse I would lay on you. But if there is a man
of you found in Moscow by to-morrow night your heads will be off your
shoulders.

BARON RAFF. You remind us wonderfully, Sire, of your Imperial father.

CZAR. I banish you all from Russia. Your estates are confiscated to the
people. You may carry your titles with you. Reforms in Russia, Baron,
always end in a farce. You will have a good opportunity, Prince
Petrovitch, of practising self-denial, that excellent virtue! that
excellent virtue! So, Baron, you think a Parliament in Russia would be
merely a place for brawling. Well, I will see that the reports of each
session are sent to you regularly.

BARON RAFF. Sire, you are adding another horror to exile.

CZAR. But you will have such time for literature now. You forget you are
diplomatists. Men of thought should have nothing to do with action.

PRINCE PETRO. Sire, we did but jest.

CZAR. Then I banish you for your bad jokes. Bon voyage, Messieurs.[4] If
you value your lives you will catch the first train for Paris. (_Exeunt
MINISTERS._) Russia is well rid of such men as these. They are the
jackals that follow in the lion's track. [5]They have no courage
themselves, except to pillage and rob.[5] But for these men and for
Prince Paul my father would have been a good king, would not have died
so horribly as he did die. How strange it is, the most real parts of
one's life always seem to be a dream! The council, the fearful law which
was to kill the people, the arrest, the cry in the courtyard, the
pistol-shot, my father's bloody hands, and then the crown! One can live
for years sometimes, without living at all, and then all life comes
crowding into a single hour. I had no time to think. Before my father's
hideous shriek of death had died in my ears I found this crown on my
head, the purple robe around me, and heard myself called a king. I would
have given it up all then; it seemed nothing to me then; but now, can I
give it up now? Well, Colonel, well? (_Enter COLONEL OF THE GUARD._)

COLONEL. What password does your Imperial Majesty desire should be given
to-night?

CZAR. Password?

COLONEL. [6]For the cordon of[6] guards, Sire, on night duty around the
palace.

CZAR. You can dismiss them. I have no need of them. (_Exit COLONEL._)
(_Goes to the crown lying on the table._) What subtle potency lies
hidden in this gaudy bauble, the crown,[7] that makes one feel like a
god when one wears it? To hold in one's hand this little fiery coloured
world, to reach out one's arm to earth's uttermost limit, to girdle the
seas with one's hosts; this is to wear a crown! to wear a crown! The
meanest serf in Russia who is loved is better crowned than I. How love
outweighs the balance! How poor appears the widest empire of this
golden world when matched with love! Pent up in this palace, with spies
dogging every step, I have heard nothing of her; I have not seen her
once since that fearful hour three days ago, when I found myself
suddenly the Czar of this wide waste, Russia. Oh, could I see her for a
moment; tell her now the secret of my life I have never dared utter
before; tell her why I wear this crown, when I have sworn eternal war
against all crowned men! There was a meeting to-night. I received my
summons by an unknown hand; but how could I go? I who have broken my
oath! who have broken my oath!

(_Enter PAGE._)

PAGE. It is after eleven, Sire. Shall I take the first watch in your
room to-night?

CZAR. Why should you watch me, boy? The stars are my best sentinels.

PAGE. It was your Imperial father's wish, Sire, never to be left alone
while he slept.

CZAR. My father was troubled with bad dreams. Go, get to your bed, boy;
it is nigh on midnight, and these late hours will spoil those red
cheeks. (_PAGE tries to kiss his hand._) Nay, nay; we have played
together too often as children for that. Oh, to breathe the same air as
her, and not to see her! the light seems to have gone from my life, the
sun vanished from my day.

PAGE. Sire,--Alexis,--let me stay with[8] you to-night! There is some
danger over you; I feel there is.

CZAR. What should I fear? I have banished all my enemies from Russia.
Set the brazier here, by me; it is very cold, and I would sit by it for
a time. Go, boy, go; I have much to think about to-night. (_Goes to back
of stage, draws aside curtain. View of Moscow by moonlight._) The snow
has fallen heavily since sunset. How white and cold my city looks under
this pale moon! And yet, what hot and fiery hearts beat in this icy
Russia, for all its frost and snow! Oh, to see her for a moment; to tell
her all; to tell her why I am a king! But she does not doubt me; she
said she would trust in me. Though I have broken my oath, she will have
trust. It is very cold. Where is my cloak? I shall sleep for an hour.
Then I have ordered my sledge, and, though I die for it, I shall see
Vera to-night. Did I not bid thee go, boy? What! must I play the tyrant
so soon? Go, go! I cannot live without seeing her. My horses will be
here in an hour; one hour between me and love! How heavy this charcoal
fire smells. (_Exit the PAGE. Lies down on a couch beside brazier._)

(_Enter VERA in a black cloak._)

VERA. Asleep! God, thou art good! Who shall deliver him from my hands
now? [9]This is he! The democrat who would make himself a king, the
republican who hath worn a crown, the traitor who hath lied to us.
Michael was right. He loved not the people. He loved me not.[9] (_Bends
over him._) Oh, why should such deadly poison lie in such sweet lips?
Was there not gold enough in his hair before, that he should tarnish it
with this crown? But my day has come now; the day of the people, of
liberty, has come! Your day, my brother, has come! Though I have
strangled whatever nature is in me, I did not think it had been so easy
to kill. One blow and it is over, and I can wash my hands in water
afterwards, I can wash my hands afterwards. Come, I shall save Russia. I
have sworn it. (_Raises dagger to strike._)

CZAR (_staring up, seizes her by both hands_). Vera, you here! My dream
was no dream at all. Why have you left me three days alone, when I most
needed you? O God, you think I am a traitor, a liar, a king? I am, for
love of you. Vera, it was for you I broke my oath and wear my father's
crown. I would lay at your feet this mighty Russia, which you and I
have loved so well; would give you this earth as a footstool! set this
crown on your head. The people will love us. We will rule them by love,
as a father rules his children. There shall be liberty in Russia for
every man to think as his heart bids him; liberty for men to speak as
they think. I have banished the wolves that preyed on us; I have brought
back your brother from Siberia; I have opened the blackened jaws of the
mine. The courier is already on his way; within a week Dmitri and all
those with him will be back in their own land. The people shall be
free--are free now--and you and I, Emperor and Empress of this mighty
realm, will walk among them openly, in love. When they gave me this
crown first, I would have flung it back to them, had it not been for
you, Vera. O God! It is men's custom in Russia to bring gifts to those
they love. I said, I will bring to the woman I love a people, an empire,
a world! Vera, it is for you, for you alone, I kept this crown; for you
alone I am a king. Oh, I have loved you better than my oath! Why will
you not speak to me? You love me not! You love me not! You have come to
warn me of some plot against my life. What is life worth to me without
you? (_CONSPIRATORS murmur outside._)

VERA. Oh, lost! lost! lost!

CZAR. Nay, you are safe here. It wants five hours still of dawn.
To-morrow, I will lead you forth to the whole people--

VERA. To-morrow--!

CZAR. Will crown you with my own hands as Empress in that great
cathedral which my fathers built.

VERA (_loosens her hands violently from him, and starts up_). I am a
Nihilist! I cannot wear a crown!

CZAR (_falls at her feet_). I am no king now. I am only a boy who has
loved you better than his honour, better than his oath. For love of the
people I would have been a patriot. For love of you I have been a
traitor. Let us go forth together, we will live amongst the common
people. I am no king. I will toil for you like the peasant or the serf.
Oh, love me a little too! (_CONSPIRATORS murmur outside._)

VERA (_clutching dagger_). To strangle whatever nature is in me, neither
to love nor to be loved, neither to pity nor---- Oh, I am a woman! God
help me, I am a woman! O Alexis! I too have broken my oath; I am a
traitor. I love. Oh, do not speak, do not speak--(_kisses his
lips_)--the first, the last time. (_He clasps her in his arms; they sit
on the couch together._)

CZAR. I could die now.

VERA. What does death do in thy lips? Thy life, thy love are enemies of
death. Speak not of death. Not yet, not yet.

CZAR. I know not why death came into my heart. Perchance the cup of life
is filled too full of pleasure to endure. This is our wedding night.

VERA. Our wedding night!

CZAR. And if death came himself, methinks that I could kiss his pallid
mouth, and suck sweet poison from it.

VERA. Our wedding night! Nay, nay. Death should not sit at the feast.
There is no such thing as death.

CZAR. There shall not be for us. (_CONSPIRATORS murmur outside._)

VERA. What is that? Did you not hear something?

CZAR. Only your voice, that fowler's note which lures my heart away like
a poor bird upon the limed twig.

VERA. Methought that some one laughed.

CZAR. It was but the wind and rain; the night is full of storm.
(_CONSPIRATORS murmur outside._)

VERA. It should be so indeed. Oh, where are your guards? where are your
guards?

CZAR. Where should they be but at home? I shall not live pent round by
sword and steel. The love of a people is a king's best body-guard.

VERA. The love of a people!

CZAR. Sweet, you are safe here. Nothing can harm you here. O love, I
knew you trusted me! You said you would have trust.

VERA. I have had trust. O love, the past seems but some dull grey dream
from which our souls have wakened. This is life at last.

CZAR. Ay, life at last.

VERA. Our wedding night! Oh, let me drink my fill of love to-night! Nay,
sweet, not yet, not yet. How still it is, and yet methinks the air is
full of music. It is some nightingale who, wearying of the south, has
come to sing in this bleak north to lovers such as we. It is the
nightingale. Dost thou not hear it?

CZAR. Oh, sweet, mine ears are clogged to all sweet sounds save thine
own voice, and mine eyes blinded to all sights but thee, else had I
heard that nightingale, and seen the golden-vestured morning sun itself
steal from its sombre east before its time for jealousy that thou art
twice as fair.

VERA. Yet would that thou hadst heard the nightingale. Methinks that
bird will never sing again.

CZAR. It is no nightingale. 'Tis love himself singing for very ecstasy
of joy that thou art changed into his votaress. (_Clock begins striking
twelve._) Oh, listen, sweet, it is the lover's hour. Come, let us stand
without, and hear the midnight answered from tower to tower over the
wide white town. Our wedding night! What is that? What is that?

(_Loud murmurs of CONSPIRATORS in the street._)

VERA (_breaks from him and rushes across the stage_). The wedding guests
are here already! Ay, you shall have your sign! (_Stabs herself._) You
shall have your sign! (_Rushes to the window._)

CZAR (_intercepts her by rushing between her and window, and snatches
dagger out of her hand_). Vera!

VERA (_clinging to him_). Give me back the dagger! Give me back the
dagger! There are men in the street who seek your life! Your guards have
betrayed you! This bloody dagger is the signal that you are dead.
(_CONSPIRATORS begin to shout below in the street._) Oh, there is not a
moment to be lost! Throw it out! Throw it out! Nothing can save me now;
this dagger is poisoned! I feel death already in my heart.

CZAR (_holding dagger out of her reach_). Death is in my heart too; we
shall die together.

VERA. Oh, love! love! love! be merciful to me! The wolves are hot upon
you! you must live for liberty, for Russia, for me! Oh, you do not love
me! You offered me an empire once! Give me this dagger now! Oh, you are
cruel! My life for yours! What does it matter? (_Loud shouts in the
street, "VERA! VERA! To the rescue! To the rescue!_")

CZAR. The bitterness of death is past for me.

VERA. Oh, they are breaking in below! See! The bloody man behind you!
(_CZAREVITCH turns round for an instant._) Ah! (_VERA snatches dagger
and flings it out of window._)

CONSPS. (_below_). Long live the people!

CZAR. What have you done?

VERA. I have saved Russia (_Dies._)

                                  SCENE

_Morning-room of Lord Windermere’s house in Carlton House Terrace_.
_Doors C. and R.  Bureau with books and papers R._  _Sofa with small
tea-table L._  _Window opening on to terrace L._  _Table R._

[LADY WINDERMERE _is at table R._, _arranging roses in a blue bowl_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Is your ladyship at home this afternoon?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes—who has called?

PARKER.  Lord Darlington, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Hesitates for a moment_.]  Show him up—and I’m at
home to any one who calls.

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

                                                               [_Exit C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  It’s best for me to see him before to-night.  I’m glad
he’s come.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  Lord Darlington,

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON _C._]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?

LADY WINDERMERE.  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  No, I can’t shake
hands with you.  My hands are all wet with these roses.  Aren’t they
lovely?  They came up from Selby this morning.

LORD DARLINGTON.  They are quite perfect.  [_Sees a fan lying on the
table_.]  And what a wonderful fan!  May I look at it?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Do.  Pretty, isn’t it!  It’s got my name on it, and
everything.  I have only just seen it myself.  It’s my husband’s birthday
present to me.  You know to-day is my birthday?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No?  Is it really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I’m of age to-day.  Quite an important day in my
life, isn’t it?  That is why I am giving this party to-night.  Do sit
down.  [_Still arranging flowers_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  I wish I had known it was your
birthday, Lady Windermere.  I would have covered the whole street in
front of your house with flowers for you to walk on.  They are made for
you.

                                                        [_A short pause_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington, you annoyed me last night at the
Foreign Office.  I am afraid you are going to annoy me again.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I, Lady Windermere?

[_Enter_ PARKER _and_ FOOTMAN _C._, _with tray and tea things_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Put it there, Parker.  That will do.  [_Wipes her hands
with her pocket-handkerchief_, _goes to tea-table_, _and sits down_.]
Won’t you come over, Lord Darlington?

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Takes chair and goes across L.C._]  I am quite
miserable, Lady Windermere.  You must tell me what I did.  [_Sits down at
table L._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Well, you kept paying me elaborate compliments the
whole evening.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah, nowadays we are all of us so hard up,
that the only pleasant things to pay _are_ compliments.  They’re the only
things we _can_ pay.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  No, I am talking very seriously.
You mustn’t laugh, I am quite serious.  I don’t like compliments, and I
don’t see why a man should think he is pleasing a woman enormously when
he says to her a whole heap of things that he doesn’t mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, but I did mean them.  [_Takes tea which she offers
him_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  I hope not.  I should be sorry to have to
quarrel with you, Lord Darlington.  I like you very much, you know that.
But I shouldn’t like you at all if I thought you were what most other men
are.  Believe me, you are better than most other men, and I sometimes
think you pretend to be worse.

LORD DARLINGTON.  We all have our little vanities, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you make that your special one?  [_Still seated
at table L._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated L.C._]  Oh, nowadays so many conceited
people go about Society pretending to be good, that I think it shows
rather a sweet and modest disposition to pretend to be bad.  Besides,
there is this to be said.  If you pretend to be good, the world takes you
very seriously.  If you pretend to be bad, it doesn’t.  Such is the
astounding stupidity of optimism.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t you _want_ the world to take you seriously then,
Lord Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, not the world.  Who are the people the world takes
seriously?  All the dull people one can think of, from the Bishops down
to the bores.  I should like _you_ to take me very seriously, Lady
Windermere, _you_ more than any one else in life.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why—why me?

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_After a slight hesitation_.]  Because I think we
might be great friends.  Let us be great friends.  You may want a friend
some day.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh!—we all want friends at times.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think we’re very good friends already, Lord
Darlington.  We can always remain so as long as you don’t—

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t what?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t spoil it by saying extravagant silly things to
me.  You think I am a Puritan, I suppose?  Well, I have something of the
Puritan in me.  I was brought up like that.  I am glad of it.  My mother
died when I was a mere child.  I lived always with Lady Julia, my
father’s elder sister, you know.  She was stern to me, but she taught me
what the world is forgetting, the difference that there is between what
is right and what is wrong.  _She_ allowed of no compromise.  _I_ allow
of none.

LORD DARLINGTON.  My dear Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning back on the sofa_.]  You look on me as being
behind the age.—Well, I am!  I should be sorry to be on the same level as
an age like this.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You think the age very bad?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Nowadays people seem to look on life as a
speculation.  It is not a speculation.  It is a sacrament.  Its ideal is
Love.  Its purification is sacrifice.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Oh, anything is better than being
sacrificed!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Leaning forward_.]  Don’t say that.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I do say it.  I feel it—I know it.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The men want to know if they are to put the carpets on the
terrace for to-night, my lady?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t think it will rain, Lord Darlington, do you?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I won’t hear of its raining on your birthday!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Tell them to do it at once, Parker.

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Still seated_.]  Do you think then—of course I am
only putting an imaginary instance—do you think that in the case of a
young married couple, say about two years married, if the husband
suddenly becomes the intimate friend of a woman of—well, more than
doubtful character—is always calling upon her, lunching with her, and
probably paying her bills—do you think that the wife should not console
herself?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Console herself?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I think she should—I think she has the right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Because the husband is vile—should the wife be vile
also?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Vileness is a terrible word, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is a terrible thing, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Do you know I am afraid that good people do a great
deal of harm in this world.  Certainly the greatest harm they do is that
they make badness of such extraordinary importance.  It is absurd to
divide people into good and bad.  People are either charming or tedious.
I take the side of the charming, and you, Lady Windermere, can’t help
belonging to them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Now, Lord Darlington.  [_Rising and crossing R._,
_front of him_.]  Don’t stir, I am merely going to finish my flowers.
[_Goes to table R.C._]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising and moving chair_.]  And I must say I think
you are very hard on modern life, Lady Windermere.  Of course there is
much against it, I admit.  Most women, for instance, nowadays, are rather
mercenary.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t talk about such people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Well then, setting aside mercenary people, who, of
course, are dreadful, do you think seriously that women who have
committed what the world calls a fault should never be forgiven?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing at table_.]  I think they should never be
forgiven.

LORD DARLINGTON.  And men?  Do you think that there should be the same
laws for men as there are for women?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Certainly!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I think life too complex a thing to be settled by these
hard and fast rules.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If we had ‘these hard and fast rules,’ we should find
life much more simple.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You allow of no exceptions?

LADY WINDERMERE.  None!

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, what a fascinating Puritan you are, Lady
Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  The adjective was unnecessary, Lord Darlington.

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t help it.  I can resist everything except
temptation.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You have the modern affectation of weakness.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Looking at her_.]  It’s only an affectation, Lady
Windermere.

[_Enter_ PARKER _C._]

PARKER.  The Duchess of Berwick and Lady Agatha Carlisle.

[_Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK and LADY AGATHA CARLISLE _C._]

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Coming down C._, _and shaking hands_.]  Dear
Margaret, I am so pleased to see you.  You remember Agatha, don’t you?
[_Crossing L.C._]  How do you do, Lord Darlington?  I won’t let you know
my daughter, you are far too wicked.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Don’t say that, Duchess.  As a wicked man I am a
complete failure.  Why, there are lots of people who say I have never
really done anything wrong in the whole course of my life.  Of course
they only say it behind my back.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Isn’t he dreadful?  Agatha, this is Lord Darlington.
Mind you don’t believe a word he says.  [LORD DARLINGTON _crosses R.C._]
No, no tea, thank you, dear.  [_Crosses and sits on sofa_.]  We have just
had tea at Lady Markby’s.  Such bad tea, too.  It was quite undrinkable.
I wasn’t at all surprised.  Her own son-in-law supplies it.  Agatha is
looking forward so much to your ball to-night, dear Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Seated L.C._]  Oh, you mustn’t think it is going to
be a ball, Duchess.  It is only a dance in honour of my birthday.  A
small and early.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Standing L.C._]  Very small, very early, and very
select, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_On sofa L._]  Of course it’s going to be select.
But we know _that_, dear Margaret, about _your_ house.  It is really one
of the few houses in London where I can take Agatha, and where I feel
perfectly secure about dear Berwick.  I don’t know what society is coming
to.  The most dreadful people seem to go everywhere.  They certainly come
to my parties—the men get quite furious if one doesn’t ask them.  Really,
some one should make a stand against it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  _I_ will, Duchess.  I will have no one in my house
about whom there is any scandal.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_R.C._]  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.  I
should never be admitted!  [_Sitting_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, men don’t matter.  With women it is different.
We’re good.  Some of us are, at least.  But we are positively getting
elbowed into the corner.  Our husbands would really forget our existence
if we didn’t nag at them from time to time, just to remind them that we
have a perfect legal right to do so.

LORD DARLINGTON.  It’s a curious thing, Duchess, about the game of
marriage—a game, by the way, that is going out of fashion—the wives hold
all the honours, and invariably lose the odd trick.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   The odd trick?  Is that the husband, Lord
Darlington?

LORD DARLINGTON.  It would be rather a good name for the modern husband.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Lord Darlington, how thoroughly depraved you
are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington is trivial.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Ah, don’t say that, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you _talk_ so trivially about life, then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Because I think that life is far too important a thing
ever to talk seriously about it.  [_Moves up C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  What does he mean?  Do, as a concession to my poor
wits, Lord Darlington, just explain to me what you really mean.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Coming down back of table_.]  I think I had better
not, Duchess.  Nowadays to be intelligible is to be found out.  Good-bye!
[_Shakes hands with_ DUCHESS.]  And now—[_goes up stage_] Lady
Windermere, good-bye.  I may come to-night, mayn’t I?  Do let me come.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing up stage with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Yes,
certainly.  But you are not to say foolish, insincere things to people.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Smiling_.]  Ah! you are beginning to reform me.  It
is a dangerous thing to reform any one, Lady Windermere.  [_Bows_, _and
exit C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Who has risen_, _goes C._]  What a charming,
wicked creature!  I like him so much.  I’m quite delighted he’s gone!
How sweet you’re looking!  Where _do_ you get your gowns?  And now I must
tell you how sorry I am for you, dear Margaret.  [_Crosses to sofa and
sits with_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Rises_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go and look over the photograph album that
I see there?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.  [_Goes to table up L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear girl!  She is so fond of photographs of
Switzerland.  Such a pure taste, I think.  But I really am so sorry for
you, Margaret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  Why, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, on account of that horrid woman.  She dresses so
well, too, which makes it much worse, sets such a dreadful example.
Augustus—you know my disreputable brother—such a trial to us all—well,
Augustus is completely infatuated about her.  It is quite scandalous, for
she is absolutely inadmissible into society.  Many a woman has a past,
but I am told that she has at least a dozen, and that they all fit.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Whom are you talking about, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  About Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne?  I never heard of her, Duchess.  And what
_has_ she to do with me?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  My poor child!  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Will you go out on the terrace and look at the
sunset?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

                                             [_Exit through window_, _L._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sweet girl!  So devoted to sunsets!  Shows such
refinement of feeling, does it not?  After all, there is nothing like
Nature, is there?

LADY WINDERMERE.  But what is it, Duchess?  Why do you talk to me about
this person?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Don’t you really know?  I assure you we’re all so
distressed about it.  Only last night at dear Lady Jansen’s every one was
saying how extraordinary it was that, of all men in London, Windermere
should behave in such a way.

LADY WINDERMERE.  My husband—what has _he_ got to do with any woman of
that kind?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, what indeed, dear?  That is the point.  He goes
to see her continually, and stops for hours at a time, and while he is
there she is not at home to any one.  Not that many ladies call on her,
dear, but she has a great many disreputable men friends—my own brother
particularly, as I told you—and that is what makes it so dreadful about
Windermere.  We looked upon _him_ as being such a model husband, but I am
afraid there is no doubt about it.  My dear nieces—you know the Saville
girls, don’t you?—such nice domestic creatures—plain, dreadfully plain,
but so good—well, they’re always at the window doing fancy work, and
making ugly things for the poor, which I think so useful of them in these
dreadful socialistic days, and this terrible woman has taken a house in
Curzon Street, right opposite them—such a respectable street, too!  I
don’t know what we’re coming to!  And they tell me that Windermere goes
there four and five times a week—they _see_ him.  They can’t help it—and
although they never talk scandal, they—well, of course—they remark on it
to every one.  And the worst of it all is that I have been told that this
woman has got a great deal of money out of somebody, for it seems that
she came to London six months ago without anything at all to speak of,
and now she has this charming house in Mayfair, drives her ponies in the
Park every afternoon and all—well, all—since she has known poor dear
Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I can’t believe it!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  But it’s quite true, my dear.  The whole of London
knows it.  That is why I felt it was better to come and talk to you, and
advise you to take Windermere away at once to Homburg or to Aix, where
he’ll have something to amuse him, and where you can watch him all day
long.  I assure you, my dear, that on several occasions after I was first
married, I had to pretend to be very ill, and was obliged to drink the
most unpleasant mineral waters, merely to get Berwick out of town.  He
was so extremely susceptible.  Though I am bound to say he never gave
away any large sums of money to anybody.  He is far too high-principled
for that!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Interrupting_.]  Duchess, Duchess, it’s impossible!
[_Rising and crossing stage to C._]  We are only married two years.  Our
child is but six months old.  [_Sits in chair R. of L. table_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah, the dear pretty baby!  How is the little
darling?  Is it a boy or a girl?  I hope a girl—Ah, no, I remember it’s a
boy!  I’m so sorry.  Boys are so wicked.  My boy is excessively immoral.
You wouldn’t believe at what hours he comes home.  And he’s only left
Oxford a few months—I really don’t know what they teach them there.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Are _all_ men bad?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Oh, all of them, my dear, all of them, without any
exception.  And they never grow any better.  Men become old, but they
never become good.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Windermere and I married for love.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Yes, we begin like that.  It was only Berwick’s
brutal and incessant threats of suicide that made me accept him at all,
and before the year was out, he was running after all kinds of
petticoats, every colour, every shape, every material.  In fact, before
the honeymoon was over, I caught him winking at my maid, a most pretty,
respectable girl.  I dismissed her at once without a character.—No, I
remember I passed her on to my sister; poor dear Sir George is so
short-sighted, I thought it wouldn’t matter.  But it did, though—it was
most unfortunate.  [_Rises_.]  And now, my dear child, I must go, as we
are dining out.  And mind you don’t take this little aberration of
Windermere’s too much to heart.  Just take him abroad, and he’ll come
back to you all right.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Come back to me?  [_C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.   [_L.C._]  Yes, dear, these wicked women get our
husbands away from us, but they always come back, slightly damaged, of
course.  And don’t make scenes, men hate them!

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is very kind of you, Duchess, to come and tell me
all this.  But I can’t believe that my husband is untrue to me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Pretty child!  I was like that once.  Now I know
that all men are monsters.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rings bell_.]  The only
thing to do is to feed the wretches well.  A good cook does wonders, and
that I know you have.  My dear Margaret, you are not going to cry?

LADY WINDERMERE.  You needn’t be afraid, Duchess, I never cry.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  That’s quite right, dear.  Crying is the refuge of
plain women but the ruin of pretty ones.  Agatha, darling!

LADY AGATHA.  [_Entering L._]  Yes, mamma.  [_Stands back of table L.C._]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Come and bid good-bye to Lady Windermere, and thank
her for your charming visit.  [_Coming down again_.]  And by the way, I
must thank you for sending a card to Mr. Hopper—he’s that rich young
Australian people are taking such notice of just at present.  His father
made a great fortune by selling some kind of food in circular tins—most
palatable, I believe—I fancy it is the thing the servants always refuse
to eat.  But the son is quite interesting.  I think he’s attracted by
dear Agatha’s clever talk.  Of course, we should be very sorry to lose
her, but I think that a mother who doesn’t part with a daughter every
season has no real affection.  We’re coming to-night, dear.  [PARKER
_opens C. doors_.]  And remember my advice, take the poor fellow out of
town at once, it is the only thing to do.  Good-bye, once more; come,
Agatha.

                                 [_Exeunt_ DUCHESS _and_ LADY AGATHA _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How horrible!  I understand now what Lord Darlington
meant by the imaginary instance of the couple not two years married.  Oh!
it can’t be true—she spoke of enormous sums of money paid to this woman.
I know where Arthur keeps his bank book—in one of the drawers of that
desk.  I might find out by that.  I _will_ find out.  [_Opens drawer_.]
No, it is some hideous mistake.  [_Rises and goes C._]  Some silly
scandal!  He loves _me_!  He loves _me_!  But why should I not look?  I
am his wife, I have a right to look!  [_Returns to bureau_, _takes out
book and examines it page by page_, _smiles and gives a sigh of relief_.]
I knew it! there is not a word of truth in this stupid story.  [_Puts
book back in dranver_.  _As the does so_, _starts and takes out another
book_.]  A second book—private—locked!  [_Tries to open it_, _but fails_.
_Sees paper knife on bureau_, _and with it cuts cover from book_.
_Begins to start at the first page_.]  ‘Mrs. Erlynne—£600—Mrs.
Erlynne—£700—Mrs. Erlynne—£400.’  Oh! it is true!  It is true!  How
horrible!  [_Throws book on floor_.]

                                            [_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, dear, has the fan been sent home yet?  [_Going
R.C._  _Sees book_.]  Margaret, you have cut open my bank book.  You have
no right to do such a thing!

LADY WINDERMERE.  You think it wrong that you are found out, don’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I think it wrong that a wife should spy on her husband.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not spy on you.  I never knew of this woman’s
existence till half an hour ago.  Some one who pitied me was kind enough
to tell me what every one in London knows already—your daily visits to
Curzon Street, your mad infatuation, the monstrous sums of money you
squander on this infamous woman!  [_Crossing L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret! don’t talk like that of Mrs. Erlynne, you
don’t know how unjust it is!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to him_.]  You are very jealous of Mrs.
Erlynne’s honour.  I wish you had been as jealous of mine.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your honour is untouched, Margaret.  You don’t think
for a moment that—[_Puts book back into desk_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I think that you spend your money strangely.  That is
all.  Oh, don’t imagine I mind about the money.  As far as I am
concerned, you may squander everything we have.  But what I _do_ mind is
that you who have loved me, you who have taught me to love you, should
pass from the love that is given to the love that is bought.  Oh, it’s
horrible!  [_Sits on sofa_.]  And it is I who feel degraded! _you_ don’t
feel anything.  I feel stained, utterly stained.  You can’t realise how
hideous the last six months seems to me now—every kiss you have given me
is tainted in my memory.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Don’t say that, Margaret.  I
never loved any one in the whole world but you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rises_.]  Who is this woman, then?  Why do you take a
house for her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I did not take a house for her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You gave her the money to do it, which is the same
thing.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Is there a Mr. Erlynne—or is he a myth?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Her husband died many years ago.  She is alone in the
world.

LADY WINDERMERE.  No relations?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  None.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Rather curious, isn’t it?  [_L._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, I was saying to you—and I beg you
to listen to me—that as far as I have known Mrs. Erlynne, she has
conducted herself well.  If years ago—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh!  [_Crossing R.C._]  I don’t want details about her
life!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  I am not going to give you any details about
her life.  I tell you simply this—Mrs. Erlynne was once honoured, loved,
respected.  She was well born, she had position—she lost everything—threw
it away, if you like.  That makes it all the more bitter.  Misfortunes
one can endure—they come from outside, they are accidents.  But to suffer
for one’s own faults—ah!—there is the sting of life.  It was twenty years
ago, too.  She was little more than a girl then.  She had been a wife for
even less time than you have.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not interested in her—and—you should not mention
this woman and me in the same breath.  It is an error of taste.
[_Sitting R. at desk_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you could save this woman.  She wants to get
back into society, and she wants you to help her.  [_Crossing to her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Me!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How impertinent of her!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I came to ask you a great favour, and I still
ask it of you, though you have discovered what I had intended you should
never have known that I have given Mrs. Erlynne a large sum of money.  I
want you to send her an invitation for our party to-night.  [_Standing L.
of her_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are mad!  [_Rises_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  I entreat you.  People may chatter about her, do
chatter about her, of course, but they don’t know anything definite
against her.  She has been to several houses—not to houses where you
would go, I admit, but still to houses where women who are in what is
called Society nowadays do go.  That does not content her.  She wants you
to receive her once.

LADY WINDERMERE.  As a triumph for her, I suppose?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No; but because she knows that you are a good woman—and
that if she comes here once she will have a chance of a happier, a surer
life than she has had.  She will make no further effort to know you.
Won’t you help a woman who is trying to get back?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!  If a woman really repents, she never wishes to
return to the society that has made or seen her ruin.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I beg of you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to door R._]  I am going to dress for
dinner, and don’t mention the subject again this evening.  Arthur [_going
to him C._], you fancy because I have no father or mother that I am alone
in the world, and that you can treat me as you choose.  You are wrong, I
have friends, many friends.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_L.C._]  Margaret, you are talking foolishly,
recklessly.  I won’t argue with you, but I insist upon your asking Mrs.
Erlynne to-night.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  I shall do nothing of the kind.  [_Crossing
L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  You refuse?  [_C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Absolutely!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Ah, Margaret, do this for my sake; it is her last
chance.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What has that to do with me?

LORD WINDERMERE.  How hard good women are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  How weak bad men are!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, none of us men may be good enough for the
women we marry—that is quite true—but you don’t imagine I would ever—oh,
the suggestion is monstrous!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should _you_ be different from other men?  I am
told that there is hardly a husband in London who does not waste his life
over _some_ shameful passion.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not one of them.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am not sure of that!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are sure in your heart.  But don’t make chasm after
chasm between us.  God knows the last few minutes have thrust us wide
enough apart.  Sit down and write the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Nothing in the whole world would induce me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to bureau_.]  Then I will!  [_Rings electric
bell_, _sits and writes card_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are going to invite this woman?  [_Crossing to
him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.  _Enter_ PARKER.]  Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lord.  [_Comes down L.C._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have this note sent to Mrs. Erlynne at No. 84A Curzon
Street.  [_Crossing to L.C. and giving note to_ PARKER.]  There is no
answer!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, if that woman comes here, I shall insult her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, don’t say that.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I mean it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Child, if you did such a thing, there’s not a woman in
London who wouldn’t pity you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  There is not a _good_ woman in London who would not
applaud me.  We have been too lax.  We must make an example.  I propose
to begin to-night.  [_Picking up fan_.]  Yes, you gave me this fan
to-day; it was your birthday present.  If that woman crosses my
threshold, I shall strike her across the face with it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you couldn’t do such a thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You don’t know me!  [_Moves R._]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

Parker!

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I shall dine in my own room.  I don’t want dinner, in
fact.  See that everything is ready by half-past ten.  And, Parker, be
sure you pronounce the names of the guests very distinctly to-night.
Sometimes you speak so fast that I miss them.  I am particularly anxious
to hear the names quite clearly, so as to make no mistake.  You
understand, Parker?

PARKER.  Yes, my lady.

LADY WINDERMERE.  That will do!

                                                      [_Exit_ PARKER _C._]

[_Speaking to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Arthur, if that woman comes here—I warn
you—

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, you’ll ruin us!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Us!  From this moment my life is separate from yours.
But if you wish to avoid a public scandal, write at once to this woman,
and tell her that I forbid her to come here!

LORD WINDERMERE.  I will not—I cannot—she must come!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Then I shall do exactly as I have said.  [_Goes R._]
You leave me no choice.

                                                               [_Exit R._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Calling after her_.]  Margaret!  Margaret!  [_A
pause_.]  My God!  What shall I do?  I dare not tell her who this woman
really is.  The shame would kill her.  [_Sinks down into a chair and
buries his face in his hands_.]

                                * * * * *

                                 ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


                                  SCENE

_Drawing-room in Lord Windermere’s house_.  _Door R.U. opening into
ball-room_, _where band is playing_.  _Door L. through which guests are
entering_.  _Door L.U. opens on to illuminated terrace_.  _Palms_,
_flowers_, _and brilliant lights_.  _Room crowded with guests_.  _Lady
Windermere is receiving them_.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Up C._]  So strange Lord Windermere isn’t here.
Mr. Hopper is very late, too.  You have kept those five dances for him,
Agatha?  [_Comes down_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Sitting on sofa_.]  Just let me see your card.
I’m so glad Lady Windermere has revived cards.—They’re a mother’s only
safeguard.  You dear simple little thing!  [_Scratches out two names_.]
No nice girl should ever waltz with such particularly younger sons!  It
looks so fast!  The last two dances you might pass on the terrace with
Mr. Hopper.

[_Enter_ MR. DUMBY _and_ LADY PLYMDALE _from the ball-room_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Fanning herself_.]  The air is so pleasant there.

PARKER.  Mrs. Cowper-Cowper.  Lady Stutfield.  Sir James Royston.  Mr.
Guy Berkeley.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

DUMBY.  Good evening, Lady Stutfield.  I suppose this will be the last
ball of the season?

LADY STUTFIELD.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It’s been a delightful season,
hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Quite delightful!  Good evening, Duchess.  I suppose this will be
the last ball of the season?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I suppose so, Mr. Dumby.  It has been a very dull
season, hasn’t it?

DUMBY.  Dreadfully dull!  Dreadfully dull!

MR. COWPER-COWPER.  Good evening, Mr. Dumby.  I suppose this will be the
last ball of the season?

DUMBY.  Oh, I think not.  There’ll probably be two more.  [_Wanders back
to_ LADY PLYMDALE.]

PARKER.  Mr. Rufford.  Lady Jedburgh and Miss Graham.  Mr. Hopper.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

HOPPER.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  How do you do, Duchess?  [_Bows
to_ LADY AGATHA.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Mr. Hopper, how nice of you to come so early.
We all know how you are run after in London.

HOPPER.  Capital place, London!  They are not nearly so exclusive in
London as they are in Sydney.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Ah! we know your value, Mr. Hopper.  We wish there
were more like you.  It would make life so much easier.  Do you know, Mr.
Hopper, dear Agatha and I are so much interested in Australia.  It must
be so pretty with all the dear little kangaroos flying about.  Agatha has
found it on the map.  What a curious shape it is!  Just like a large
packing case.  However, it is a very young country, isn’t it?

HOPPER.  Wasn’t it made at the same time as the others, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  How clever you are, Mr. Hopper.  You have a
cleverness quite of your own.  Now I mustn’t keep you.

HOPPER.  But I should like to dance with Lady Agatha, Duchess.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Well, I hope she has a dance left.  Have you a dance
left, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  The next one?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

HOPPER.  May I have the pleasure?  [LADY AGATHA _bows_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Mind you take great care of my little chatterbox,
Mr. Hopper.

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _pass into ball-room_.]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Margaret, I want to speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  In a moment.  [_The music drops_.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good evening, Lady Windermere.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Sir James, will you take me into the ball-room?
Augustus has been dining with us to-night.  I really have had quite
enough of dear Augustus for the moment.

[SIR JAMES ROYSTON _gives the_ DUCHESS _his aim and escorts her into the
ball-room_.]

PARKER.  Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Bowden.  Lord and Lady Paisley.  Lord
Darlington.

[_These people enter as announced_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coming up to_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Want to speak to you
particularly, dear boy.  I’m worn to a shadow.  Know I don’t look it.
None of us men do look what we really are.  Demmed good thing, too.  What
I want to know is this.  Who is she?  Where does she come from?  Why
hasn’t she got any demmed relations?  Demmed nuisance, relations!  But
they make one so demmed respectable.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You are talking of Mrs. Erlynne, I suppose?  I only met
her six months ago.  Till then, I never knew of her existence.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You have seen a good deal of her since then.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coldly_.]  Yes, I have seen a good deal of her since
then.  I have just seen her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Egad! the women are very down on her.  I have been dining
with Arabella this evening!  By Jove! you should have heard what she said
about Mrs. Erlynne.  She didn’t leave a rag on her. . . . [_Aside_.]
Berwick and I told her that didn’t matter much, as the lady in question
must have an extremely fine figure.  You should have seen Arabella’s
expression! . . . But, look here, dear boy.  I don’t know what to do
about Mrs. Erlynne.  Egad!  I might be married to her; she treats me with
such demmed indifference.  She’s deuced clever, too!  She explains
everything.  Egad! she explains you.  She has got any amount of
explanations for you—and all of them different.

LORD WINDERMERE.  No explanations are necessary about my friendship with
Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Hem!  Well, look here, dear old fellow.  Do you think she
will ever get into this demmed thing called Society?  Would you introduce
her to your wife?  No use beating about the confounded bush.  Would you
do that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here to-night.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Your wife has sent her a card?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne has received a card.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Then she’s all right, dear boy.  But why didn’t you tell
me that before?  It would have saved me a heap of worry and demmed
misunderstandings!

[LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _cross and exit on terrace L.U.E._]

PARKER.  Mr. Cecil Graham!

[_Enter_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE, _passes over and shakes hands
with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  Good evening, Arthur.  Why don’t you ask me how
I am?  I like people to ask me how I am.  It shows a wide-spread interest
in my health.  Now, to-night I am not at all well.  Been dining with my
people.  Wonder why it is one’s people are always so tedious?  My father
would talk morality after dinner.  I told him he was old enough to know
better.  But my experience is that as soon as people are old enough to
know better, they don’t know anything at all.  Hallo, Tuppy!  Hear you’re
going to be married again; thought you were tired of that game.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re excessively trivial, my dear boy, excessively
trivial!

CECIL GRAHAM.  By the way, Tuppy, which is it?  Have you been twice
married and once divorced, or twice divorced and once married?  I say
you’ve been twice divorced and once married.  It seems so much more
probable.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I have a very bad memory.  I really don’t remember which.
[_Moves away R._]

LADY PLYMDALE.  Lord Windermere, I’ve something most particular to ask
you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am afraid—if you will excuse me—I must join my wife.

LADY PLYMDALE.  Oh, you mustn’t dream of such a thing.  It’s most
dangerous nowadays for a husband to pay any attention to his wife in
public.  It always makes people think that he beats her when they’re
alone.  The world has grown so suspicious of anything that looks like a
happy married life.  But I’ll tell you what it is at supper.  [_Moves
towards door of ball-room_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  Margaret!  I _must_ speak to you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Will you hold my fan for me, Lord Darlington?  Thanks.
[_Comes down to him_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Margaret, what you said before
dinner was, of course, impossible?

LADY WINDERMERE.  That woman is not coming here to-night!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_R.C._]  Mrs. Erlynne is coming here, and if you in
any way annoy or wound her, you will bring shame and sorrow on us both.
Remember that!  Ah, Margaret! only trust me!  A wife should trust her
husband!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_C._]  London is full of women who trust their
husbands.  One can always recognise them.  They look so thoroughly
unhappy.  I am not going to be one of them.  [_Moves up_.]  Lord
Darlington, will you give me back my fan, please?  Thanks. . . . A useful
thing a fan, isn’t it? . . . I want a friend to-night, Lord Darlington: I
didn’t know I would want one so soon.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Lady Windermere!  I knew the time would come some day;
but why to-night?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _will_ tell her.  I must.  It would be terrible if
there were any scene.  Margaret . . .

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[LORD WINDERMERE _starts_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _enters_, _very beautifully
dressed and very dignified_.  LADY WINDERMERE _clutches at her fan_,
_then lets it drop on the door_.  _She bows coldly to_ MRS. ERLYNNE, _who
bows to her sweetly in turn_, _and sails into the room_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You have dropped your fan, Lady Windermere.  [_Picks it
up and hands it to her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  How do you do, again, Lord Windermere?  How
charming your sweet wife looks!  Quite a picture!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_In a low voice_.]  It was terribly rash of you to
come!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  The wisest thing I ever did in my life.
And, by the way, you must pay me a good deal of attention this evening.
I am afraid of the women.  You must introduce me to some of them.  The
men I can always manage.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  You have quite
neglected me lately.  I have not seen you since yesterday.  I am afraid
you’re faithless.  Every one told me so.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_R._]  Now really, Mrs. Erlynne, allow me to explain.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  No, dear Lord Augustus, you can’t explain
anything.  It is your chief charm.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Ah! if you find charms in me, Mrs. Erlynne—

[_They converse together_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves uneasily about the
room watching_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_To_ LADY WINDERMERE.]  How pale you are!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Cowards are always pale!

LORD DARLINGTON.  You look faint.  Come out on the terrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_To_ PARKER.]  Parker, send my cloak out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crossing to her_.]  Lady Windermere, how beautifully
your terrace is illuminated.  Reminds me of Prince Doria’s at Rome.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bows coldly_, _and goes off with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]

Oh, how do you do, Mr. Graham?  Isn’t that your aunt, Lady Jedburgh?  I
should so much like to know her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_After a moment’s hesitation and embarrassment_.]  Oh,
certainly, if you wish it.  Aunt Caroline, allow me to introduce Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So pleased to meet you, Lady Jedburgh.  [_Sits beside her
on the sofa_.]  Your nephew and I are great friends.  I am so much
interested in his political career.  I think he’s sure to be a wonderful
success.  He thinks like a Tory, and talks like a Radical, and that’s so
important nowadays.  He’s such a brilliant talker, too.  But we all know
from whom he inherits that.  Lord Allandale was saying to me only
yesterday, in the Park, that Mr. Graham talks almost as well as his aunt.

LADY JEDBURGH.  [_R._]  Most kind of you to say these charming things to
me!  [MRS. ERLYNNE _smiles_, _and continues conversation_.]

DUMBY.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]  Did you introduce Mrs. Erlynne to Lady
Jedburgh?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Had to, my dear fellow.  Couldn’t help it!  That woman can
make one do anything she wants.  How, I don’t know.

DUMBY.  Hope to goodness she won’t speak to me!  [_Saunters towards_ LADY
PLYMDALE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._  _To_ LADY JEDBURGH.]  On Thursday?  With great
pleasure.  [_Rises_, _and speaks to_ LORD WINDERMERE, _laughing_.]  What
a bore it is to have to be civil to these old dowagers!  But they always
insist on it!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  Who is that well-dressed woman talking
to Windermere?

DUMBY.  Haven’t got the slightest idea!  Looks like an _édition de luxe_
of a wicked French novel, meant specially for the English market.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So that is poor Dumby with Lady Plymdale?  I hear she is
frightfully jealous of him.  He doesn’t seem anxious to speak to me
to-night.  I suppose he is afraid of her.  Those straw-coloured women
have dreadful tempers.  Do you know, I think I’ll dance with you first,
Windermere.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bits his lip and frowns_.]  It will make
Lord Augustus so jealous!  Lord Augustus!  [LORD AUGUSTUS _comes down_.]
Lord Windermere insists on my dancing with him first, and, as it’s his
own house, I can’t well refuse.  You know I would much sooner dance with
you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_With a low bow_.]  I wish I could think so, Mrs.
Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You know it far too well.  I can fancy a person dancing
through life with you and finding it charming.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Placing his hand on his white waistcoat_.]  Oh, thank
you, thank you.  You are the most adorable of all ladies!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  What a nice speech!  So simple and so sincere!  Just the
sort of speech I like.  Well, you shall hold my bouquet.  [_Goes towards
ball-room on_ LORD WINDERMERE’S _arm_.]  Ah, Mr. Dumby, how are you?  I
am so sorry I have been out the last three times you have called.  Come
and lunch on Friday.

DUMBY.  [_With perfect nonchalance_.]  Delighted!

[LADY PLYMDALE _glares with indignation at_ MR. DUMBY.  LORD AUGUSTUS
_follows_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE _into the ball-room holding
bouquet_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_To_ MR. DUMBY.]  What an absolute brute you are!  I
never can believe a word you say!  Why did you tell me you didn’t know
her?  What do you mean by calling on her three times running?  You are
not to go to lunch there; of course you understand that?

DUMBY.  My dear Laura, I wouldn’t dream of going!

LADY PLYMDALE.  You haven’t told me her name yet!  Who is she?

DUMBY.  [_Coughs slightly and smooths his hair_.]  She’s a Mrs. Erlynne.

LADY PLYMDALE.  That woman!

DUMBY.  Yes; that is what every one calls her.

LADY PLYMDALE.  How very interesting!  How intensely interesting!  I
really must have a good stare at her.  [_Goes to door of ball-room and
looks in_.]  I have heard the most shocking things about her.  They say
she is ruining poor Windermere.  And Lady Windermere, who goes in for
being so proper, invites her!  How extremely amusing!  It takes a
thoroughly good woman to do a thoroughly stupid thing.  You are to lunch
there on Friday!

DUMBY.  Why?

LADY PLYMDALE.  Because I want you to take my husband with you.  He has
been so attentive lately, that he has become a perfect nuisance.  Now,
this woman is just the thing for him.  He’ll dance attendance upon her as
long as she lets him, and won’t bother me.  I assure you, women of that
kind are most useful.  They form the basis of other people’s marriages.

DUMBY.  What a mystery you are!

LADY PLYMDALE.  [_Looking at him_.]  I wish _you_ were!

DUMBY.  I am—to myself.  I am the only person in the world I should like
to know thoroughly; but I don’t see any chance of it just at present.

[_They pass into the ball-room_, _and_ LADY WINDERMERE _and_ LORD
DARLINGTON _enter from the terrace_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Her coming here is monstrous, unbearable.  I know
now what you meant to-day at tea-time.  Why didn’t you tell me right out?
You should have!

LORD DARLINGTON.  I couldn’t!  A man can’t tell these things about
another man!  But if I had known he was going to make you ask her here
to-night, I think I would have told you.  That insult, at any rate, you
would have been spared.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I did not ask her.  He insisted on her coming—against
my entreaties—against my commands.  Oh! the house is tainted for me!  I
feel that every woman here sneers at me as she dances by with my husband.
What have I done to deserve this?  I gave him all my life.  He took
it—used it—spoiled it!  I am degraded in my own eyes; and I lack
courage—I am a coward!  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  If I know you at all, I know that you can’t live with a
man who treats you like this!  What sort of life would you have with him?
You would feel that he was lying to you every moment of the day.  You
would feel that the look in his eyes was false, his voice false, his
touch false, his passion false.  He would come to you when he was weary
of others; you would have to comfort him.  He would come to you when he
was devoted to others; you would have to charm him.  You would have to be
to him the mask of his real life, the cloak to hide his secret.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You are right—you are terribly right.  But where am I
to turn?  You said you would be my friend, Lord Darlington.—Tell me, what
am I to do?  Be my friend now.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Between men and women there is no friendship possible.
There is passion, enmity, worship, love, but no friendship.  I love you—

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, no!  [_Rises_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes, I love you!  You are more to me than anything in
the whole world.  What does your husband give you?  Nothing.  Whatever is
in him he gives to this wretched woman, whom he has thrust into your
society, into your home, to shame you before every one.  I offer you my
life—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  My life—my whole life.  Take it, and do with it what
you will. . . . I love you—love you as I have never loved any living
thing.  From the moment I met you I loved you, loved you blindly,
adoringly, madly!  You did not know it then—you know it now!  Leave this
house to-night.  I won’t tell you that the world matters nothing, or the
world’s voice, or the voice of society.  They matter a great deal.  They
matter far too much.  But there are moments when one has to choose
between living one’s own life, fully, entirely, completely—or dragging
out some false, shallow, degrading existence that the world in its
hypocrisy demands.  You have that moment now.  Choose!  Oh, my love,
choose.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moving slowly away from him_, _and looking at him
with startled eyes_.]  I have not the courage.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Following her_.]  Yes; you have the courage.  There
may be six months of pain, of disgrace even, but when you no longer bear
his name, when you bear mine, all will be well.  Margaret, my love, my
wife that shall be some day—yes, my wife!  You know it!  What are you
now?  This woman has the place that belongs by right to you.  Oh! go—go
out of this house, with head erect, with a smile upon your lips, with
courage in your eyes.  All London will know why you did it; and who will
blame you?  No one.  If they do, what matter?  Wrong?  What is wrong?
It’s wrong for a man to abandon his wife for a shameless woman.  It is
wrong for a wife to remain with a man who so dishonours her.  You said
once you would make no compromise with things.  Make none now.  Be brave!
Be yourself!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid of being myself.  Let me think!  Let me
wait!  My husband may return to me.  [_Sits down on sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  And you would take him back!  You are not what I
thought you were.  You are just the same as every other woman.  You would
stand anything rather than face the censure of a world, whose praise you
would despise.  In a week you will be driving with this woman in the
Park.  She will be your constant guest—your dearest friend.  You would
endure anything rather than break with one blow this monstrous tie.  You
are right.  You have no courage; none!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Ah, give me time to think.  I cannot answer you now.
[_Passes her hand nervously over her brow_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  It must be now or not at all.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising from the sofa_.]  Then, not at all!  [_A
pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You break my heart!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mine is already broken.  [_A pause_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  To-morrow I leave England.  This is the last time I
shall ever look on you.  You will never see me again.  For one moment our
lives met—our souls touched.  They must never meet or touch again.
Good-bye, Margaret.  [_Exit_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  How alone I am in life!  How terribly alone!

[_The music stops_.  _Enter the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _and_ LORD PAISLEY
_laughing and talking_.  _Other guests come on from ball-room_.]

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Dear Margaret, I’ve just been having such a
delightful chat with Mrs. Erlynne.  I am so sorry for what I said to you
this afternoon about her.  Of course, she must be all right if _you_
invite her.  A most attractive woman, and has such sensible views on
life.  Told me she entirely disapproved of people marrying more than
once, so I feel quite safe about poor Augustus.  Can’t imagine why people
speak against her.  It’s those horrid nieces of mine—the Saville
girls—they’re always talking scandal.  Still, I should go to Homburg,
dear, I really should.  She is just a little too attractive.  But where
is Agatha?  Oh, there she is:  [LADY AGATHA _and_ MR. HOPPER _enter from
terrace L.U.E._]  Mr. Hopper, I am very, very angry with you.  You have
taken Agatha out on the terrace, and she is so delicate.

HOPPER.  Awfully sorry, Duchess.  We went out for a moment and then got
chatting together.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_C._]  Ah, about dear Australia, I suppose?

HOPPER.  Yes!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, darling!  [_Beckons her over_.]

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma!

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Aside_.]  Did Mr. Hopper definitely—

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  And what answer did you give him, dear child?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Affectionately_.]  My dear one!  You always say
the right thing.  Mr. Hopper!  James!  Agatha has told me everything.
How cleverly you have both kept your secret.

HOPPER.  You don’t mind my taking Agatha off to Australia, then, Duchess?

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Indignantly_.]  To Australia?  Oh, don’t mention
that dreadful vulgar place.

HOPPER.  But she said she’d like to come with me.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  [_Severely_.]  Did you say that, Agatha?

LADY AGATHA.  Yes, mamma.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  Agatha, you say the most silly things possible.  I
think on the whole that Grosvenor Square would be a more healthy place to
reside in.  There are lots of vulgar people live in Grosvenor Square, but
at any rate there are no horrid kangaroos crawling about.  But we’ll talk
about that to-morrow.  James, you can take Agatha down.  You’ll come to
lunch, of course, James.  At half-past one, instead of two.  The Duke
will wish to say a few words to you, I am sure.

HOPPER.  I should like to have a chat with the Duke, Duchess.  He has not
said a single word to me yet.

DUCHESS OF BERWICK.  I think you’ll find he will have a great deal to say
to you to-morrow.  [_Exit_ LADY AGATHA _with_ MR. HOPPER.]  And now
good-night, Margaret.  I’m afraid it’s the old, old story, dear.
Love—well, not love at first sight, but love at the end of the season,
which is so much more satisfactory.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-night, Duchess.

[_Exit the_ DUCHESS OF BERWICK _on_ LORD PAISLEY’S _arm_.]

LADY PLYMDALE.  My dear Margaret, what a handsome woman your husband has
been dancing with!  I should be quite jealous if I were you!  Is she a
great friend of yours?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No!

LADY PLYMDALE.  Really?  Good-night, dear.  [_Looks at_ MR. DUMBY _and
exit_.]

DUMBY.  Awful manners young Hopper has!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Ah!  Hopper is one of Nature’s gentlemen, the worst type
of gentleman I know.

DUMBY.  Sensible woman, Lady Windermere.  Lots of wives would have
objected to Mrs. Erlynne coming.  But Lady Windermere has that uncommon
thing called common sense.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And Windermere knows that nothing looks so like innocence
as an indiscretion.

DUMBY.  Yes; dear Windermere is becoming almost modern.  Never thought he
would.  [_Bows to_ LADY WINDERMERE _and exit_.]

LADY JEDBURGH.  Good night, Lady Windermere.  What a fascinating woman
Mrs. Erlynne is!  She is coming to lunch on Thursday, won’t you come too?
I expect the Bishop and dear Lady Merton.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am afraid I am engaged, Lady Jedburgh.

LADY JEDBURGH.  So sorry.  Come, dear.  [_Exeunt_ LADY JEDBURGH _and_
MISS GRAHAM.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Charming ball it has been!  Quite reminds me of old days.
[_Sits on sofa_.]  And I see that there are just as many fools in society
as there used to be.  So pleased to find that nothing has altered!
Except Margaret.  She’s grown quite pretty.  The last time I saw
her—twenty years ago, she was a fright in flannel.  Positive fright, I
assure you.  The dear Duchess! and that sweet Lady Agatha!  Just the type
of girl I like!  Well, really, Windermere, if I am to be the Duchess’s
sister-in-law—

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting L. of her_.]  But are you—?

[_Exit_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM _with rest of guests_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_watches_, _with a look of scorn and pain_, MRS. ERLYNNE _and her
husband_.  _They are unconscious of her presence_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, yes!  He’s to call to-morrow at twelve o’clock!  He
wanted to propose to-night.  In fact he did.  He kept on proposing.  Poor
Augustus, you know how he repeats himself.  Such a bad habit!  But I told
him I wouldn’t give him an answer till to-morrow.  Of course I am going
to take him.  And I dare say I’ll make him an admirable wife, as wives
go.  And there is a great deal of good in Lord Augustus.  Fortunately it
is all on the surface.  Just where good qualities should be.  Of course
you must help me in this matter.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am not called on to encourage Lord Augustus, I
suppose?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, no!  I do the encouraging.  But you will make me a
handsome settlement, Windermere, won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Frowning_.]  Is that what you want to talk to me
about to-night?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_With a gesture of impatience_.]  I will not talk of
it here.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Then we will talk of it on the terrace.
Even business should have a picturesque background.  Should it not,
Windermere?  With a proper background women can do anything.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Won’t to-morrow do as well?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; you see, to-morrow I am going to accept him.  And I
think it would be a good thing if I was able to tell him that I had—well,
what shall I say?—£2000 a year left to me by a third cousin—or a second
husband—or some distant relative of that kind.  It would be an additional
attraction, wouldn’t it?  You have a delightful opportunity now of paying
me a compliment, Windermere.  But you are not very clever at paying
compliments.  I am afraid Margaret doesn’t encourage you in that
excellent habit.  It’s a great mistake on her part.  When men give up
saying what is charming, they give up thinking what is charming.  But
seriously, what do you say to £2000?  £2500, I think.  In modern life
margin is everything.  Windermere, don’t you think the world an intensely
amusing place?  I do!

[_Exit on terrace with_ LORD WINDERMERE.  Music strikes up in ball-room.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  To stay in this house any longer is impossible.
To-night a man who loves me offered me his whole life.  I refused it.  It
was foolish of me.  I will offer him mine now.  I will give him mine.  I
will go to him!  [_Puts on cloak and goes to the door_, _then turns
back_.  _Sits down at table and writes a letter_, _puts it into an
envelope_, _and leaves it on table_.]  Arthur has never understood me.
When he reads this, he will.  He may do as he chooses now with his life.
I have done with mine as I think best, as I think right.  It is he who
has broken the bond of marriage—not I.  I only break its bondage.

                                                                 [_Exit_.]

[_PARKER enters L. and crosses towards the ball-room R._  _Enter_ MRS.
ERLYNNE.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Is Lady Windermere in the ball-room?

PARKER.  Her ladyship has just gone out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Gone out?  She’s not on the terrace?

PARKER.  No, madam.  Her ladyship has just gone out of the house.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _and looks at the servant with a puzzled
expression in her face_.]  Out of the house?

PARKER.  Yes, madam—her ladyship told me she had left a letter for his
lordship on the table.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  A letter for Lord Windermere?

PARKER.  Yes, madam.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thank you.

[_Exit_ PARKER.  _The music in the ball-room stops_.]  Gone out of her
house!  A letter addressed to her husband!  [_Goes over to bureau and
looks at letter_.  _Takes it up and lays it down again with a shudder of
fear_.]  No, no!  It would be impossible!  Life doesn’t repeat its
tragedies like that!  Oh, why does this horrible fancy come across me?
Why do I remember now the one moment of my life I most wish to forget?
Does life repeat its tragedies?  [_Tears letter open and reads it_, _then
sinks down into a chair with a gesture of anguish_.]  Oh, how terrible!
The same words that twenty years ago I wrote to her father! and how
bitterly I have been punished for it!  No; my punishment, my real
punishment is to-night, is now!  [_Still seated R._]

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE _L.U.E._]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Have you said good-night to my wife?  [_Comes C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Crushing letter in her hand_.]  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Where is she?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  She is very tired.  She has gone to bed.  She said she had
a headache.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I must go to her.  You’ll excuse me?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising hurriedly_.]  Oh, no!  It’s nothing serious.
She’s only very tired, that is all.  Besides, there are people still in
the supper-room.  She wants you to make her apologies to them.  She said
she didn’t wish to be disturbed.  [_Drops letter_.]  She asked me to tell
you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Picks up letter_.]  You have dropped something.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh yes, thank you, that is mine.  [_Puts out her hand to
take it_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Still looking at letter_.]  But it’s my wife’s
handwriting, isn’t it?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the letter quickly_.]  Yes, it’s—an address.  Will
you ask them to call my carriage, please?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Certainly.

                                                     [_Goes L. and Exit_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks!  What can I do?  What can I do?  I feel a passion
awakening within me that I never felt before.  What can it mean?  The
daughter must not be like the mother—that would be terrible.  How can I
save her?  How can I save my child?  A moment may ruin a life.  Who knows
that better than I?  Windermere must be got out of the house; that is
absolutely necessary.  [_Goes L._]  But how shall I do it?  It must be
done somehow.  Ah!

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _R.U.E. carrying bouquet_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Dear lady, I am in such suspense!  May I not have an
answer to my request?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus, listen to me.  You are to take Lord
Windermere down to your club at once, and keep him there as long as
possible.  You understand?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  But you said you wished me to keep early hours!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Nervously_.]  Do what I tell you.  Do what I tell you.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  And my reward?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Your reward?  Your reward?  Oh! ask me that to-morrow.
But don’t let Windermere out of your sight to-night.  If you do I will
never forgive you.  I will never speak to you again.  I’ll have nothing
to do with you.  Remember you are to keep Windermere at your club, and
don’t let him come back to-night.

                                                               [_Exit L._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, really, I might be her husband already.  Positively
I might.  [_Follows her in a bewildered manner_.]

                                * * * * *

                                ACT DROP.




THIRD ACT


                                  SCENE

_Lord Darlington’s Rooms_.  _A large sofa is in front of fireplace R._
_At the back of the stage a curtain is drawn across the window_.  _Doors
L. and R._  _Table R. with writing materials.  Table C. with syphons,
glasses, and Tantalus frame_.  _Table L. with cigar and cigarette box.
Lamps lit_.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Standing by the fireplace_.]  Why doesn’t he come?
This waiting is horrible.  He should be here.  Why is he not here, to
wake by passionate words some fire within me?  I am cold—cold as a
loveless thing.  Arthur must have read my letter by this time.  If he
cared for me, he would have come after me, would have taken me back by
force.  But he doesn’t care.  He’s entrammelled by this woman—fascinated
by her—dominated by her.  If a woman wants to hold a man, she has merely
to appeal to what is worst in him.  We make gods of men and they leave
us.  Others make brutes of them and they fawn and are faithful.  How
hideous life is! . . . Oh! it was mad of me to come here, horribly mad.
And yet, which is the worst, I wonder, to be at the mercy of a man who
loves one, or the wife of a man who in one’s own house dishonours one?
What woman knows?  What woman in the whole world?  But will he love me
always, this man to whom I am giving my life?  What do I bring him?  Lips
that have lost the note of joy, eyes that are blinded by tears, chill
hands and icy heart.  I bring him nothing.  I must go back—no; I can’t go
back, my letter has put me in their power—Arthur would not take me back!
That fatal letter!  No!  Lord Darlington leaves England to-morrow.  I
will go with him—I have no choice.  [_Sits down for a few moments_.
_Then starts up and puts on her cloak_.]  No, no!  I will go back, let
Arthur do with me what he pleases.  I can’t wait here.  It has been
madness my coming.  I must go at once.  As for Lord Darlington—Oh! here
he is!  What shall I do?  What can I say to him?  Will he let me go away
at all?  I have heard that men are brutal, horrible . . . Oh!  [_Hides
her face in her hands_.]

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE _L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere!  [LADY WINDERMERE _starts and looks up_.
_Then recoils in contempt_.]  Thank Heaven I am in time.  You must go
back to your husband’s house immediately.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Must?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Authoritatively_.]  Yes, you must!  There is not a
second to be lost.  Lord Darlington may return at any moment.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t come near me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You are on the brink of ruin, you are on the brink of
a hideous precipice.  You must leave this place at once, my carriage is
waiting at the corner of the street.  You must come with me and drive
straight home.

[LADY WINDERMERE _throws off her cloak and flings it on the sofa_.]

What are you doing?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne—if you had not come here, I would have
gone back.  But now that I see you, I feel that nothing in the whole
world would induce me to live under the same roof as Lord Windermere.
You fill me with horror.  There is something about you that stirs the
wildest—rage within me.  And I know why you are here.  My husband sent
you to lure me back that I might serve as a blind to whatever relations
exist between you and him.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh!  You don’t think that—you can’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Go back to my husband, Mrs. Erlynne.  He belongs to you
and not to me.  I suppose he is afraid of a scandal.  Men are such
cowards.  They outrage every law of the world, and are afraid of the
world’s tongue.  But he had better prepare himself.  He shall have a
scandal.  He shall have the worst scandal there has been in London for
years.  He shall see his name in every vile paper, mine on every hideous
placard.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—no—

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes! he shall.  Had he come himself, I admit I would
have gone back to the life of degradation you and he had prepared for
me—I was going back—but to stay himself at home, and to send you as his
messenger—oh! it was infamous—infamous.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_C._]  Lady Windermere, you wrong me horribly—you wrong
your husband horribly.  He doesn’t know you are here—he thinks you are
safe in your own house.  He thinks you are asleep in your own room.  He
never read the mad letter you wrote to him!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_R._]  Never read it!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No—he knows nothing about it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  How simple you think me!  [_Going to her_.]  You are
lying to me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Restraining herself_.]  I am not.  I am telling you the
truth.

LADY WINDERMERE.  If my husband didn’t read my letter, how is it that you
are here?  Who told you I had left the house you were shameless enough to
enter?  Who told you where I had gone to?  My husband told you, and sent
you to decoy me back.  [_Crosses L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_R.C._]  Your husband has never seen the letter.  I—saw
it, I opened it.  I—read it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Turning to her_.]  You opened a letter of mine to my
husband?  You wouldn’t dare!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Dare!  Oh! to save you from the abyss into which you are
falling, there is nothing in the world I would not dare, nothing in the
whole world.  Here is the letter.  Your husband has never read it.  He
never shall read it.  [_Going to fireplace_.]  It should never have been
written.  [_Tears it and throws it into the fire_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With infinite contempt in her voice and look_.]  How
do I know that that was my letter after all?  You seem to think the
commonest device can take me in!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! why do you disbelieve everything I tell you?  What
object do you think I have in coming here, except to save you from utter
ruin, to save you from the consequence of a hideous mistake?  That letter
that is burnt now _was_ your letter.  I swear it to you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Slowly_.]  You took good care to burn it before I had
examined it.  I cannot trust you.  You, whose whole life is a lie, could
you speak the truth about anything?  [_Sits down_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Hurriedly_.]  Think as you like about me—say what you
choose against me, but go back, go back to the husband you love.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sullenly_.]  I do _not_ love him!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You do, and you know that he loves you.

LADY WINDERMERE.  He does not understand what love is.  He understands it
as little as you do—but I see what you want.  It would be a great
advantage for you to get me back.  Dear Heaven! what a life I would have
then!  Living at the mercy of a woman who has neither mercy nor pity in
her, a woman whom it is an infamy to meet, a degradation to know, a vile
woman, a woman who comes between husband and wife!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a gesture of despair_.]  Lady Windermere, Lady
Windermere, don’t say such terrible things.  You don’t know how terrible
they are, how terrible and how unjust.  Listen, you must listen!  Only go
back to your husband, and I promise you never to communicate with him
again on any pretext—never to see him—never to have anything to do with
his life or yours.  The money that he gave me, he gave me not through
love, but through hatred, not in worship, but in contempt.  The hold I
have over him—

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Ah! you admit you have a hold!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, and I will tell you what it is.  It is his love for
you, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  You expect me to believe that?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You must believe it!  It is true.  It is his love for you
that has made him submit to—oh! call it what you like, tyranny, threats,
anything you choose.  But it is his love for you.  His desire to spare
you—shame, yes, shame and disgrace.

LADY WINDERMERE.  What do you mean?  You are insolent!  What have I to do
with you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Humbly_.]  Nothing.  I know it—but I tell you that your
husband loves you—that you may never meet with such love again in your
whole life—that such love you will never meet—and that if you throw it
away, the day may come when you will starve for love and it will not be
given to you, beg for love and it will be denied you—Oh! Arthur loves
you!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur?  And you tell me there is nothing between you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lady Windermere, before Heaven your husband is guiltless
of all offence towards you!  And I—I tell you that had it ever occurred
to me that such a monstrous suspicion would have entered your mind, I
would have died rather than have crossed your life or his—oh! died,
gladly died!  [_Moves away to sofa R._]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You talk as if you had a heart.  Women like you have no
hearts.  Heart is not in you.  You are bought and sold.  [_Sits L.C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Starts_, _with a gesture of pain_.  _Then restrains
herself_, _and comes over to where_ LADY WINDERMERE _is sitting_.  _As
she speaks_, _she stretches out her hands towards her_, _but does not
dare to touch her_.]  Believe what you choose about me.  I am not worth a
moment’s sorrow.  But don’t spoil your beautiful young life on my
account!  You don’t know what may be in store for you, unless you leave
this house at once.  You don’t know what it is to fall into the pit, to
be despised, mocked, abandoned, sneered at—to be an outcast! to find the
door shut against one, to have to creep in by hideous byways, afraid
every moment lest the mask should be stripped from one’s face, and all
the while to hear the laughter, the horrible laughter of the world, a
thing more tragic than all the tears the world has ever shed.  You don’t
know what it is.  One pays for one’s sin, and then one pays again, and
all one’s life one pays.  You must never know that.—As for me, if
suffering be an expiation, then at this moment I have expiated all my
faults, whatever they have been; for to-night you have made a heart in
one who had it not, made it and broken it.—But let that pass.  I may have
wrecked my own life, but I will not let you wreck yours.  You—why, you
are a mere girl, you would be lost.  You haven’t got the kind of brains
that enables a woman to get back.  You have neither the wit nor the
courage.  You couldn’t stand dishonour!  No!  Go back, Lady Windermere,
to the husband who loves you, whom you love.  You have a child, Lady
Windermere.  Go back to that child who even now, in pain or in joy, may
be calling to you.  [LADY WINDERMERE _rises_.]  God gave you that child.
He will require from you that you make his life fine, that you watch over
him.  What answer will you make to God if his life is ruined through you?
Back to your house, Lady Windermere—your husband loves you!  He has never
swerved for a moment from the love he bears you.  But even if he had a
thousand loves, you must stay with your child.  If he was harsh to you,
you must stay with your child.  If he ill-treated you, you must stay with
your child.  If he abandoned you, your place is with your child.

[LADY WINDERMERE _bursts into tears and buries her face in her hands_.]

[_Rushing to her_.]  Lady Windermere!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Holding out her hands to her_, _helplessly_, _as a
child might do_.]  Take me home.  Take me home.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Is about to embrace her_.  _Then restrains herself_.
_There is a look of wonderful joy in her face_.]  Come!  Where is your
cloak?  [_Getting it from sofa_.]  Here.  Put it on.  Come at once!

[_They go to the door_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Stop!  Don’t you hear voices?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No, no!  There was no one!

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, there is!  Listen!  Oh! that is my husband’s
voice!  He is coming in!  Save me!  Oh, it’s some plot!  You have sent
for him.

[_Voices outside_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Silence!  I’m here to save you, if I can.  But I fear it
is too late!  There! [_Points to the curtain across the window_.]  The
first chance you have, slip out, if you ever get a chance!

LADY WINDERMERE.  But you?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh! never mind me.  I’ll face them.

[LADY WINDERMERE _hides herself behind the curtain_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Outside_.]  Nonsense, dear Windermere, you must not
leave me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Lord Augustus!  Then it is I who am lost!  [_Hesitates for
a moment_, then _looks round and sees door R._, _and exits through it_.]

[_Enter_ LORD DARLINGTON, MR. DUMBY, LORD WINDERMERE, LORD AUGUSTUS
LORTON, _and_ MR. CECIL GRAHAM.

DUMBY.  What a nuisance their turning us out of the club at this hour!
It’s only two o’clock.  [_Sinks into a chair_.]  The lively part of the
evening is only just beginning.  [_Yawns and closes his eyes_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  It is very good of you, Lord Darlington, allowing
Augustus to force our company on you, but I’m afraid I can’t stay long.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Really!  I am so sorry!  You’ll take a cigar, won’t
you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Thanks!  [_Sits down_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  My dear boy, you must not dream
of going.  I have a great deal to talk to you about, of demmed
importance, too.  [_Sits down with him at L. table_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  We all know what that is!  Tuppy can’t talk about
anything but Mrs. Erlynne.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, that is no business of yours, is it, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  None!  That is why it interests me.  My own business
always bores me to death.  I prefer other people’s.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Have something to drink, you fellows.  Cecil, you’ll
have a whisky and soda?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Thanks.  [_Goes to table with_ LORD DARLINGTON.]  Mrs.
Erlynne looked very handsome to-night, didn’t she?

LORD DARLINGTON.  I am not one of her admirers.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I usen’t to be, but I am now.  Why! she actually made me
introduce her to poor dear Aunt Caroline.  I believe she is going to
lunch there.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_In Purple_.]  No?

CECIL GRAHAM.  She is, really.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Excuse me, you fellows.  I’m going away to-morrow.  And
I have to write a few letters.  [_Goes to writing table and sits down_.]

DUMBY.  Clever woman, Mrs. Erlynne.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Hallo, Dumby!  I thought you were asleep.

DUMBY.  I am, I usually am!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  A very clever woman.  Knows perfectly well what a demmed
fool I am—knows it as well as I do myself.

[CECIL GRAHAM _comes towards him laughing_.]

Ah, you may laugh, my boy, but it is a great thing to come across a woman
who thoroughly understands one.

DUMBY.  It is an awfully dangerous thing.  They always end by marrying
one.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I thought, Tuppy, you were never going to see her
again!  Yes! you told me so yesterday evening at the club.  You said
you’d heard—

[_Whispering to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Oh, she’s explained that.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And the Wiesbaden affair?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  She’s explained that too.

DUMBY.  And her income, Tuppy?  Has she explained that?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_In a very serious voice_.]  She’s going to explain that
to-morrow.

[CECIL GRAHAM _goes back to C. table_.]

DUMBY.  Awfully commercial, women nowadays.  Our grandmothers threw their
caps over the mills, of course, but, by Jove, their granddaughters only
throw their caps over mills that can raise the wind for them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You want to make her out a wicked woman.  She is not!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh!  Wicked women bother one.  Good women bore one.  That
is the only difference between them.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Puffing a cigar_.]  Mrs. Erlynne has a future before
her.

DUMBY.  Mrs. Erlynne has a past before her.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  I prefer women with a past.  They’re always so demmed
amusing to talk to.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Well, you’ll have lots of topics of conversation with
_her_, Tuppy.  [_Rising and going to him_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  You’re getting annoying, dear-boy; you’re getting demmed
annoying.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Puts his hands on his shoulders_.]  Now, Tuppy, you’ve
lost your figure and you’ve lost your character.  Don’t lose your temper;
you have only got one.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, if I wasn’t the most good-natured man in
London—

CECIL GRAHAM.  We’d treat you with more respect, wouldn’t we, Tuppy?
[_Strolls away_.]

DUMBY.  The youth of the present day are quite monstrous.  They have
absolutely no respect for dyed hair.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks round
angrily_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Mrs. Erlynne has a very great respect for dear Tuppy.

DUMBY.  Then Mrs. Erlynne sets an admirable example to the rest of her
sex.  It is perfectly brutal the way most women nowadays behave to men
who are not their husbands.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Dumby, you are ridiculous, and Cecil, you let your
tongue run away with you.  You must leave Mrs. Erlynne alone.  You don’t
really know anything about her, and you’re always talking scandal against
her.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Coming towards him L.C._]  My dear Arthur, I never talk
scandal.  _I_ only talk gossip.

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is the difference between scandal and gossip?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Oh! gossip is charming!  History is merely gossip.  But
scandal is gossip made tedious by morality.  Now, I never moralise.  A
man who moralises is usually a hypocrite, and a woman who moralises is
invariably plain.  There is nothing in the whole world so unbecoming to a
woman as a Nonconformist conscience.  And most women know it, I’m glad to
say.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Just my sentiments, dear boy, just my sentiments.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Sorry to hear it, Tuppy; whenever people agree with me, I
always feel I must be wrong.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  My dear boy, when I was your age—

CECIL GRAHAM.  But you never were, Tuppy, and you never will be.  [_Goes
up C._]  I say, Darlington, let us have some cards.  You’ll play, Arthur,
won’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  No, thanks, Cecil.

DUMBY.  [_With a sigh_.]  Good heavens! how marriage ruins a man!  It’s
as demoralising as cigarettes, and far more expensive.

CECIL GRAHAM.  You’ll play, of course, Tuppy?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Pouring himself out a brandy and soda at table_.]
Can’t, dear boy.  Promised Mrs. Erlynne never to play or drink again.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Now, my dear Tuppy, don’t be led astray into the paths of
virtue.  Reformed, you would be perfectly tedious.  That is the worst of
women.  They always want one to be good.  And if we are good, when they
meet us, they don’t love us at all.  They like to find us quite
irretrievably bad, and to leave us quite unattractively good.

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Rising from R. table_, _where he has been writing
letters_.]  They always do find us bad!

DUMBY.  I don’t think we are bad.  I think we are all good, except Tuppy.

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, we are all in the gutter, but some of us are
looking at the stars.  [_Sits down at C. table_.]

DUMBY.  We are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the
stars?  Upon my word, you are very romantic to-night, Darlington.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Too romantic!  You must be in love.  Who is the girl?

LORD DARLINGTON.  The woman I love is not free, or thinks she isn’t.
[_Glances instinctively at_ LORD WINDERMERE _while he speaks_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  A married woman, then!  Well, there’s nothing in the world
like the devotion of a married woman.  It’s a thing no married man knows
anything about.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Oh! she doesn’t love me.  She is a good woman.  She is
the only good woman I have ever met in my life.

CECIL GRAHAM.  The only good woman you have ever met in your life?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Yes!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Lighting a cigarette_.]  Well, you are a lucky fellow!
Why, I have met hundreds of good women.  I never seem to meet any but
good women.  The world is perfectly packed with good women.  To know them
is a middle-class education.

LORD DARLINGTON.  This woman has purity and innocence.  She has
everything we men have lost.

CECIL GRAHAM.  My dear fellow, what on earth should we men do going about
with purity and innocence?  A carefully thought-out buttonhole is much
more effective.

DUMBY.  She doesn’t really love you then?

LORD DARLINGTON.  No, she does not!

DUMBY.  I congratulate you, my dear fellow.  In this world there are only
two tragedies.  One is not getting what one wants, and the other is
getting it.  The last is much the worst; the last is a real tragedy!  But
I am interested to hear she does not love you.  How long could you love a
woman who didn’t love you, Cecil?

CECIL GRAHAM.  A woman who didn’t love me?  Oh, all my life!

DUMBY.  So could I.  But it’s so difficult to meet one.

LORD DARLINGTON.  How can you be so conceited, DUMBY?

DUMBY.  I didn’t say it as a matter of conceit.  I said it as a matter of
regret.  I have been wildly, madly adored.  I am sorry I have.  It has
been an immense nuisance.  I should like to be allowed a little time to
myself now and then.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Looking round_.]  Time to educate yourself, I suppose.

DUMBY.  No, time to forget all I have learned.  That is much more
important, dear Tuppy.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _moves uneasily in his chair_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  What cynics you fellows are!

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is a cynic?  [_Sitting on the back of the sofa_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  A man who knows the price of everything and the value
of nothing.

CECIL GRAHAM.  And a sentimentalist, my dear Darlington, is a man who
sees an absurd value in everything, and doesn’t know the market price of
any single thing.

LORD DARLINGTON.  You always amuse me, Cecil.  You talk as if you were a
man of experience.

CECIL GRAHAM.  I am.  [_Moves up to front off fireplace_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You are far too young!

CECIL GRAHAM.  That is a great error.  Experience is a question of
instinct about life.  I have got it.  Tuppy hasn’t.  Experience is the
name Tuppy gives to his mistakes.  That is all.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _looks
round indignantly_.]

DUMBY.  Experience is the name every one gives to their mistakes.

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_Standing with his back to the fireplace_.]  One
shouldn’t commit any.  [_Sees_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan on sofa_.]

DUMBY.  Life would be very dull without them.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Of course you are quite faithful to this woman you are in
love with, Darlington, to this good woman?

LORD DARLINGTON.  Cecil, if one really loves a woman, all other women in
the world become absolutely meaningless to one.  Love changes one—_I_ am
changed.

CECIL GRAHAM.  Dear me!  How very interesting!  Tuppy, I want to talk to
you.  [LORD AUGUSTUS _takes no notice_.]

DUMBY.  It’s no use talking to Tuppy.  You might just as well talk to a
brick wall.

CECIL GRAHAM.  But I like talking to a brick wall—it’s the only thing in
the world that never contradicts me!  Tuppy!

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Well, what is it?  What is it?  [_Rising and going over
to_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  Come over here.  I want you particularly.  [_Aside_.]
Darlington has been moralising and talking about the purity of love, and
that sort of thing, and he has got some woman in his rooms all the time.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  No, really! really!

CECIL GRAHAM.  [_In a low voice_.]  Yes, here is her fan.  [_Points to
the fan_.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Chuckling_.]  By Jove!  By Jove!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Up by door_.]  I am really off now, Lord Darlington.
I am sorry you are leaving England so soon.  Pray call on us when you
come back!  My wife and I will be charmed to see you!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Upstage with_ LORD WINDERMERE.]  I am afraid I shall
be away for many years.  Good-night!

CECIL GRAHAM.  Arthur!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What?

CECIL GRAHAM.  I want to speak to you for a moment.  No, do come!

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Putting on his coat_.]  I can’t—I’m off!

CECIL GRAHAM.  It is something very particular.  It will interest you
enormously.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling_.]  It is some of your nonsense, Cecil.

CECIL GRAHAM.  It isn’t!  It isn’t really.

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Going to him_.]  My dear fellow, you mustn’t go yet.  I
have a lot to talk to you about.  And Cecil has something to show you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Walking over_.]  Well, what is it?

CECIL GRAHAM.  Darlington has got a woman here in his rooms.  Here is her
fan.  Amusing, isn’t it?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Good God!  [_Seizes the fan_—DUMBY _rises_.]

CECIL GRAHAM.  What is the matter?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Lord Darlington!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Turning round_.]  Yes!

LORD WINDERMERE.  What is my wife’s fan doing here in your rooms?  Hands
off, Cecil.  Don’t touch me.

LORD DARLINGTON.  Your wife’s fan?

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, here it is!

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Walking towards him_.]  I don’t know!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You must know.  I demand an explanation.  Don’t hold
me, you fool.  [_To_ CECIL GRAHAM.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  [_Aside_.]  She is here after all!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Speak, sir!  Why is my wife’s fan here?  Answer me!  By
God!  I’ll search your rooms, and if my wife’s here, I’ll—  [_Moves_.]

LORD DARLINGTON.  You shall not search my rooms.  You have no right to do
so.  I forbid you!

LORD WINDERMERE.  You scoundrel!  I’ll not leave your room till I have
searched every corner of it!  What moves behind that curtain?  [_Rushes
towards the curtain C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Enters behind R._]  Lord Windermere!

LORD WINDERMERE.  Mrs. Erlynne!

[_Every one starts and turns round_.  LADY WINDERMERE _slips out from
behind the curtain and glides from the room L._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid I took your wife’s fan in mistake for my own,
when I was leaving your house to-night.  I am so sorry.  [_Takes fan from
him_.  LORD WINDERMERE _looks at her in contempt_.  LORD DARLINGTON _in
mingled astonishment and anger_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _turns away_.  _The other
men smile at each other_.]

                                ACT DROP.




FOURTH ACT


                         SCENE—Same as in Act I.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Lying on sofa_.]  How can I tell him?  I can’t tell
him.  It would kill me.  I wonder what happened after I escaped from that
horrible room.  Perhaps she told them the true reason of her being there,
and the real meaning of that—fatal fan of mine.  Oh, if he knows—how can
I look him in the face again?  He would never forgive me.  [_Touches
bell_.]  How securely one thinks one lives—out of reach of temptation,
sin, folly.  And then suddenly—Oh!  Life is terrible.  It rules us, we do
not rule it.

[_Enter_ ROSALIE _R._]

ROSALIE.  Did your ladyship ring for me?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  Have you found out at what time Lord Windermere
came in last night?

ROSALIE.  His lordship did not come in till five o’clock.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Five o’clock?  He knocked at my door this morning,
didn’t he?

ROSALIE.  Yes, my lady—at half-past nine.  I told him your ladyship was
not awake yet.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Did he say anything?

ROSALIE.  Something about your ladyship’s fan.  I didn’t quite catch what
his lordship said.  Has the fan been lost, my lady?  I can’t find it, and
Parker says it was not left in any of the rooms.  He has looked in all of
them and on the terrace as well.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It doesn’t matter.  Tell Parker not to trouble.  That
will do.

                                                         [_Exit_ ROSALIE.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  She is sure to tell him.  I can fancy a
person doing a wonderful act of self-sacrifice, doing it spontaneously,
recklessly, nobly—and afterwards finding out that it costs too much.  Why
should she hesitate between her ruin and mine? . . . How strange!  I
would have publicly disgraced her in my own house.  She accepts public
disgrace in the house of another to save me. . . . There is a bitter
irony in things, a bitter irony in the way we talk of good and bad women.
. . . Oh, what a lesson! and what a pity that in life we only get our
lessons when they are of no use to us!  For even if she doesn’t tell, I
must.  Oh! the shame of it, the shame of it.  To tell it is to live
through it all again.  Actions are the first tragedy in life, words are
the second.  Words are perhaps the worst.  Words are merciless. . . . Oh!
[_Starts as_ LORD WINDERMERE _enters_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Kisses her_.]  Margaret—how pale you look!

LADY WINDERMERE.  I slept very badly.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Sitting on sofa with her_.]  I am so sorry.  I came
in dreadfully late, and didn’t like to wake you.  You are crying, dear.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, I am crying, for I have something to tell you,
Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, you are not well.  You’ve been doing too
much.  Let us go away to the country.  You’ll be all right at Selby.  The
season is almost over.  There is no use staying on.  Poor darling!  We’ll
go away to-day, if you like.  [_Rises_.]  We can easily catch the 3.40.
I’ll send a wire to Fannen.  [_Crosses and sits down at table to write a
telegram_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes; let us go away to-day.  No; I can’t go to-day,
Arthur.  There is some one I must see before I leave town—some one who
has been kind to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising and leaning over sofa_.]  Kind to you?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Far more than that.  [_Rises and goes to him_.]  I will
tell you, Arthur, but only love me, love me as you used to love me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Used to?  You are not thinking of that wretched woman
who came here last night?  [_Coming round and sitting R. of her_.]  You
don’t still imagine—no, you couldn’t.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I don’t.  I know now I was wrong and foolish.

LORD WINDERMERE.  It was very good of you to receive her last night—but
you are never to see her again.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why do you say that?  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Holding her hand_.]  Margaret, I thought Mrs. Erlynne
was a woman more sinned against than sinning, as the phrase goes.  I
thought she wanted to be good, to get back into a place that she had lost
by a moment’s folly, to lead again a decent life.  I believed what she
told me—I was mistaken in her.  She is bad—as bad as a woman can be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, Arthur, don’t talk so bitterly about any woman.
I don’t think now that people can be divided into the good and the bad as
though they were two separate races or creations.  What are called good
women may have terrible things in them, mad moods of recklessness,
assertion, jealousy, sin.  Bad women, as they are termed, may have in
them sorrow, repentance, pity, sacrifice.  And I don’t think Mrs. Erlynne
a bad woman—I know she’s not.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My dear child, the woman’s impossible.  No matter what
harm she tries to do us, you must never see her again.  She is
inadmissible anywhere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  But I want to see her.  I want her to come here.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Never!

LADY WINDERMERE.  She came here once as _your_ guest.  She must come now
as _mine_.  That is but fair.

LORD WINDERMERE.  She should never have come here.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  It is too late, Arthur, to say that now.
[_Moves away_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Margaret, if you knew where Mrs. Erlynne
went last night, after she left this house, you would not sit in the same
room with her.  It was absolutely shameless, the whole thing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, I can’t bear it any longer.  I must tell you.
Last night—

[_Enter_ PARKER _with a tray on which lie_ LADY WINDERMERE’S _fan and a
card_.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne has called to return your ladyship’s fan which she
took away by mistake last night.  Mrs. Erlynne has written a message on
the card.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, ask Mrs. Erlynne to be kind enough to come up.
[_Reads card_.]  Say I shall be very glad to see her.

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

She wants to see me, Arthur.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Takes card and looks at it_.]  Margaret, I _beg_ you
not to.  Let me see her first, at any rate.  She’s a very dangerous
woman.  She is the most dangerous woman I know.  You don’t realise what
you’re doing.

LADY WINDERMERE.  It is right that I should see her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  My child, you may be on the brink of a great sorrow.
Don’t go to meet it.  It is absolutely necessary that I should see her
before you do.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Why should it be necessary?

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Mrs. Erlynne.

[_Enter_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]

                                                          [_Exit_ PARKER.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  [_To_ LORD WINDERMERE.]
How do you do?  Do you know, Lady Windermere, I am so sorry about your
fan.  I can’t imagine how I made such a silly mistake.  Most stupid of
me.  And as I was driving in your direction, I thought I would take the
opportunity of returning your property in person with many apologies for
my carelessness, and of bidding you good-bye.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Good-bye?  [_Moves towards sofa with_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and
sits down beside her_.]  Are you going away, then, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes; I am going to live abroad again.  The English climate
doesn’t suit me.  My—heart is affected here, and that I don’t like.  I
prefer living in the south.  London is too full of fogs and—and serious
people, Lord Windermere.  Whether the fogs produce the serious people or
whether the serious people produce the fogs, I don’t know, but the whole
thing rather gets on my nerves, and so I’m leaving this afternoon by the
Club Train.

LADY WINDERMERE.  This afternoon?  But I wanted so much to come and see
you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How kind of you!  But I am afraid I have to go.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Shall I never see you again, Mrs. Erlynne?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I am afraid not.  Our lives lie too far apart.  But there
is a little thing I would like you to do for me.  I want a photograph of
you, Lady Windermere—would you give me one?  You don’t know how gratified
I should be.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, with pleasure.  There is one on that table.  I’ll
show it to you. [_Goes across to the table_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Coming up to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _and speaking in a low
voice_.]  It is monstrous your intruding yourself here after your conduct
last night.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With an amused smile_.]  My dear Windermere, manners
before morals!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Returning_.]  I’m afraid it is very flattering—I am
not so pretty as that.  [_Showing photograph_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are much prettier.  But haven’t you got one of
yourself with your little boy?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I have.  Would you prefer one of those?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I’ll go and get it for you, if you’ll excuse me for a
moment.  I have one upstairs.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  So sorry, Lady Windermere, to give you so much trouble.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Moves to door R._]  No trouble at all, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Thanks so much.

[_Exit_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._]  You seem rather out of temper this
morning, Windermere.  Why should you be?  Margaret and I get on
charmingly together.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I can’t bear to see you with her.  Besides, you have
not told me the truth, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I have not told _her_ the truth, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Standing C._]  I sometimes wish you had.  I should
have been spared then the misery, the anxiety, the annoyance of the last
six months.  But rather than my wife should know—that the mother whom she
was taught to consider as dead, the mother whom she has mourned as dead,
is living—a divorced woman, going about under an assumed name, a bad
woman preying upon life, as I know you now to be—rather than that, I was
ready to supply you with money to pay bill after bill, extravagance after
extravagance, to risk what occurred yesterday, the first quarrel I have
ever had with my wife.  You don’t understand what that means to me.  How
could you?  But I tell you that the only bitter words that ever came from
those sweet lips of hers were on your account, and I hate to see you next
her.  You sully the innocence that is in her. [_Moves L.C._]  And then I
used to think that with all your faults you were frank and honest.  You
are not.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Why do you say that?

LORD WINDERMERE.  You made me get you an invitation to my wife’s ball.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  For my daughter’s ball—yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You came, and within an hour of your leaving the house
you are found in a man’s rooms—you are disgraced before every one.
[_Goes up stage C._]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Turning round on her_.]  Therefore I have a right to
look upon you as what you are—a worthless, vicious woman.  I have the
right to tell you never to enter this house, never to attempt to come
near my wife—

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Coldly_.]  My daughter, you mean.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You have no right to claim her as your daughter.  You
left her, abandoned her when she was but a child in the cradle, abandoned
her for your lover, who abandoned you in turn.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  Do you count that to his credit, Lord
Windermere—or to mine?

LORD WINDERMERE.  To his, now that I know you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Take care—you had better be careful.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Oh, I am not going to mince words for you.  I know you
thoroughly.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Looks steadily at him_.]  I question that.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I _do_ know you.  For twenty years of your life you
lived without your child, without a thought of your child.  One day you
read in the papers that she had married a rich man.  You saw your hideous
chance.  You knew that to spare her the ignominy of learning that a woman
like you was her mother, I would endure anything.  You began your
blackmailing.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Shrugging her shoulders_.]  Don’t use ugly words,
Windermere.  They are vulgar.  I saw my chance, it is true, and took it.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Yes, you took it—and spoiled it all last night by being
found out.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a strange smile_.]  You are quite right, I spoiled
it all last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  And as for your blunder in taking my wife’s fan from
here and then leaving it about in Darlington’s rooms, it is unpardonable.
I can’t bear the sight of it now.  I shall never let my wife use it
again.  The thing is soiled for me.  You should have kept it and not
brought it back.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I shall keep it.  [_Goes up_.]  It’s extremely
pretty.  [_Takes up fan_.]  I shall ask Margaret to give it to me.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I hope my wife will give it you.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Oh, I’m sure she will have no objection.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I wish that at the same time she would give you a
miniature she kisses every night before she prays—It’s the miniature of a
young innocent-looking girl with beautiful _dark_ hair.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ah, yes, I remember.  How long ago that seems!  [_Goes to
sofa and sits down_.]  It was done before I was married.  Dark hair and
an innocent expression were the fashion then, Windermere!  [_A pause_.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  What do you mean by coming here this morning?  What is
your object?  [_Crossing L.C. and sitting_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a note of irony in her voice_.]  To bid good-bye to
my dear daughter, of course.  [LORD WINDERMERE _bites his under lip in
anger_.  MRS. ERLYNNE _looks at him_, _and her voice and manner become
serious_.  _In her accents at she talks there is a note of deep tragedy_.
_For a moment she reveals herself_.]  Oh, don’t imagine I am going to
have a pathetic scene with her, weep on her neck and tell her who I am,
and all that kind of thing.  I have no ambition to play the part of a
mother.  Only once in my life have I known a mother’s feelings.  That was
last night.  They were terrible—they made me suffer—they made me suffer
too much.  For twenty years, as you say, I have lived childless,—I want
to live childless still.  [_Hiding her feelings with a trivial laugh_.]
Besides, my dear Windermere, how on earth could I pose as a mother with a
grown-up daughter?  Margaret is twenty-one, and I have never admitted
that I am more than twenty-nine, or thirty at the most.  Twenty-nine when
there are pink shades, thirty when there are not.  So you see what
difficulties it would involve.  No, as far as I am concerned, let your
wife cherish the memory of this dead, stainless mother.  Why should I
interfere with her illusions?  I find it hard enough to keep my own.  I
lost one illusion last night.  I thought I had no heart.  I find I have,
and a heart doesn’t suit me, Windermere.  Somehow it doesn’t go with
modern dress.  It makes one look old.  [_Takes up hand-mirror from table
and looks into it_.]  And it spoils one’s career at critical moments.

LORD WINDERMERE.  You fill me with horror—with absolute horror.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I suppose, Windermere, you would like me to
retire into a convent, or become a hospital nurse, or something of that
kind, as people do in silly modern novels.  That is stupid of you,
Arthur; in real life we don’t do such things—not as long as we have any
good looks left, at any rate.  No—what consoles one nowadays is not
repentance, but pleasure.  Repentance is quite out of date.  And besides,
if a woman really repents, she has to go to a bad dressmaker, otherwise
no one believes in her.  And nothing in the world would induce me to do
that.  No; I am going to pass entirely out of your two lives.  My coming
into them has been a mistake—I discovered that last night.

LORD WINDERMERE.  A fatal mistake.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Smiling_.]  Almost fatal.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am sorry now I did not tell my wife the whole thing
at once.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I regret my bad actions.  You regret your good ones—that
is the difference between us.

LORD WINDERMERE.  I don’t trust you.  I _will_ tell my wife.  It’s better
for her to know, and from me.  It will cause her infinite pain—it will
humiliate her terribly, but it’s right that she should know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You propose to tell her?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I am going to tell her.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Going up to him_.]  If you do, I will make my name so
infamous that it will mar every moment of her life.  It will ruin her,
and make her wretched.  If you dare to tell her, there is no depth of
degradation I will not sink to, no pit of shame I will not enter.  You
shall not tell her—I forbid you.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Why?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_After a pause_.]  If I said to you that I cared for her,
perhaps loved her even—you would sneer at me, wouldn’t you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  I should feel it was not true.  A mother’s love means
devotion, unselfishness, sacrifice.  What could you know of such things?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You are right.  What could I know of such things?  Don’t
let us talk any more about it—as for telling my daughter who I am, that I
do not allow.  It is my secret, it is not yours.  If I make up my mind to
tell her, and I think I will, I shall tell her before I leave the
house—if not, I shall never tell her.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Angrily_.]  Then let me beg of you to leave our house
at once.  I will make your excuses to Margaret.

[_Enter_ LADY WINDERMERE _R._  _She goes over to_ MRS. ERLYNNE _with the
photograph in her hand_.  LORD WINDERMERE _moves to back of sofa_, _and
anxiously watches_ MRS. ERLYNNE _as the scene progresses_.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  I am so sorry, Mrs. Erlynne, to have kept you waiting.
I couldn’t find the photograph anywhere.  At last I discovered it in my
husband’s dressing-room—he had stolen it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Takes the photograph from her and looks at it_.]  I am
not surprised—it is charming.  [_Goes over to sofa with_ LADY WINDERMERE,
_and sits down beside her_.  _Looks again at the photograph_.]  And so
that is your little boy!  What is he called?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Gerard, after my dear father.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laying the photograph down_.]  Really?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  If it had been a girl, I would have called it
after my mother.  My mother had the same name as myself, Margaret.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  My name is Margaret too.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Indeed!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]  You are devoted to your mother’s memory,
Lady Windermere, your husband tells me.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We all have ideals in life.  At least we all should
have.  Mine is my mother.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Ideals are dangerous things.  Realities are better.  They
wound, but they’re better.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Shaking her head_.]  If I lost my ideals, I should
lose everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Everything?

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes.  [_Pause_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Did your father often speak to you of your mother?

LADY WINDERMERE.  No, it gave him too much pain.  He told me how my
mother had died a few months after I was born.  His eyes filled with
tears as he spoke.  Then he begged me never to mention her name to him
again.  It made him suffer even to hear it.  My father—my father really
died of a broken heart.  His was the most ruined life know.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go now, Lady Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Rising_.]  Oh no, don’t.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  I think I had better.  My carriage must have come back by
this time.  I sent it to Lady Jedburgh’s with a note.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Arthur, would you mind seeing if Mrs. Erlynne’s
carriage has come back?

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Pray don’t trouble, Lord Windermere.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Yes, Arthur, do go, please.

[LORD WINDERMERE _hesitated for a moment and looks at_ MRS. ERLYNNE.
_She remains quite impassive_.  _He leaves the room_.]

[_To_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Oh!  What am I to say to you?  You saved me last
night?  [_Goes towards her_.]

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Hush—don’t speak of it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  I must speak of it.  I can’t let you think that I am
going to accept this sacrifice.  I am not.  It is too great.  I am going
to tell my husband everything.  It is my duty.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It is not your duty—at least you have duties to others
besides him.  You say you owe me something?

LADY WINDERMERE.  I owe you everything.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Then pay your debt by silence.  That is the only way in
which it can be paid.  Don’t spoil the one good thing I have done in my
life by telling it to any one.  Promise me that what passed last night
will remain a secret between us.  You must not bring misery into your
husband’s life.  Why spoil his love?  You must not spoil it.  Love is
easily killed.  Oh! how easily love is killed.  Pledge me your word, Lady
Windermere, that you will never tell him.  I insist upon it.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_With bowed head_.]  It is your will, not mine.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Yes, it is my will.  And never forget your child—I like to
think of you as a mother.  I like you to think of yourself as one.

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Looking up_.]  I always will now.  Only once in my
life I have forgotten my own mother—that was last night.  Oh, if I had
remembered her I should not have been so foolish, so wicked.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_With a slight shudder_.]  Hush, last night is quite
over.

[_Enter_ LORD WINDERMERE.]

LORD WINDERMERE.  Your carriage has not come back yet, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  It makes no matter.  I’ll take a hansom.  There is nothing
in the world so respectable as a good Shrewsbury and Talbot.  And now,
dear Lady Windermere, I am afraid it is really good-bye.  [_Moves up C._]
Oh, I remember.  You’ll think me absurd, but do you know I’ve taken a
great fancy to this fan that I was silly enough to run away with last
night from your ball.  Now, I wonder would you give it to me?  Lord
Windermere says you may.  I know it is his present.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, certainly, if it will give you any pleasure.  But
it has my name on it.  It has ‘Margaret’ on it.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  But we have the same Christian name.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Oh, I forgot.  Of course, do have it.  What a wonderful
chance our names being the same!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  Quite wonderful.  Thanks—it will always remind me of you.
[_Shakes hands with her_.]

[_Enter_ PARKER.]

PARKER.  Lord Augustus Lorton.  Mrs. Erlynne’s carriage has come.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Good morning, dear boy.  Good morning, Lady Windermere.
[_Sees_ MRS. ERLYNNE.]  Mrs. Erlynne!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  Are you quite well this
morning?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Coldly_.]  Quite well, thank you, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  You don’t look at all well, Lord Augustus.  You stop up
too late—it is so bad for you.  You really should take more care of
yourself.  Good-bye, Lord Windermere. [_Goes towards door with a bow to_
LORD AUGUSTUS.  _Suddenly smiles and looks back at him_.]  Lord Augustus!
Won’t you see me to my carriage?  You might carry the fan.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Allow me!

MRS. ERLYNNE.  No; I want Lord Augustus.  I have a special message for
the dear Duchess.  Won’t you carry the fan, Lord Augustus?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  If you really desire it, Mrs. Erlynne.

MRS. ERLYNNE.  [_Laughing_.]  Of course I do.  You’ll carry it so
gracefully.  You would carry off anything gracefully, dear Lord Augustus.

[_When she reaches the door she looks back for a moment at_ LADY
WINDERMERE.  _Their eyes meet_.  _Then she turns_, _and exit C. followed
by_ LORD AUGUSTUS.]

LADY WINDERMERE.  You will never speak against Mrs. Erlynne again,
Arthur, will you?

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Gravely_.]  She is better than one thought her.

LADY WINDERMERE.  She is better than I am.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Smiling as he strokes her hair_.]  Child, you and she
belong to different worlds.  Into your world evil has never entered.

LADY WINDERMERE.  Don’t say that, Arthur.  There is the same world for
all of us, and good and evil, sin and innocence, go through it hand in
hand.  To shut one’s eyes to half of life that one may live securely is
as though one blinded oneself that one might walk with more safety in a
land of pit and precipice.

LORD WINDERMERE.  [_Moves down with her_.]  Darling, why do you say that?

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Sits on sofa_.]  Because I, who had shut my eyes to
life, came to the brink.  And one who had separated us—

LORD WINDERMERE.  We were never separated.

LADY WINDERMERE.  We never must be again.  O Arthur, don’t love me less,
and I will trust you more.  I will trust you absolutely.  Let us go to
Selby.  In the Rose Garden at Selby the roses are white and red.

[_Enter_ LORD AUGUSTUS _C._]

LORD AUGUSTUS.  Arthur, she has explained everything!

[LADY WINDERMERE _looks horribly frightened at this_.  LORD WINDERMERE
_starts_.  LORD AUGUSTUS _takes_ WINDERMERE _by the arm and brings him to
front of stage_.  _He talks rapidly and in a low voice_.  LADY WINDERMERE
_stands watching them in terror_.]  My dear fellow, she has explained
every demmed thing.  We all wronged her immensely.  It was entirely for
my sake she went to Darlington’s rooms.  Called first at the Club—fact
is, wanted to put me out of suspense—and being told I had gone
on—followed—naturally frightened when she heard a lot of us coming
in—retired to another room—I assure you, most gratifying to me, the whole
thing.  We all behaved brutally to her.  She is just the woman for me.
Suits me down to the ground.  All the conditions she makes are that we
live entirely out of England.  A very good thing too.  Demmed clubs,
demmed climate, demmed cooks, demmed everything.  Sick of it all!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Frightened_.]  Has Mrs. Erlynne—?

LORD AUGUSTUS.  [_Advancing towards her with a low bow_.]  Yes, Lady
Windermere—  Mrs. Erlynne has done me the honour of accepting my hand.

LORD WINDERMERE.  Well, you are certainly marrying a very clever woman!

LADY WINDERMERE.  [_Taking her husband’s hand_.]  Ah, you’re marrying a
very good woman!

FIRST ACT


                                  SCENE

              _Lawn in front of the terrace at Hunstanton_.

[SIR JOHN _and_ LADY CAROLINE PONTEFRACT, MISS WORSLEY, _on chairs under
large yew tree_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe this is the first English country house you
have stayed at, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Yes, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You have no country houses, I am told, in America?

HESTER.  We have not many.

LADY CAROLINE.  Have you any country?  What we should call country?

HESTER.  [_Smiling_.]  We have the largest country in the world, Lady
Caroline.  They used to tell us at school that some of our states are as
big as France and England put together.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah! you must find it very draughty, I should fancy.
[_To_ SIR JOHN.]  John, you should have your muffler.  What is the use of
my always knitting mufflers for you if you won’t wear them?

SIR JOHN.  I am quite warm, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  Well, you couldn’t come to a more
charming place than this, Miss Worsley, though the house is excessively
damp, quite unpardonably damp, and dear Lady Hunstanton is sometimes a
little lax about the people she asks down here.  [_To_ SIR JOHN.]  Jane
mixes too much.  Lord Illingworth, of course, is a man of high
distinction.  It is a privilege to meet him.  And that member of
Parliament, Mr. Kettle—

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY CAROLINE.  He must be quite respectable.  One has never heard his
name before in the whole course of one’s life, which speaks volumes for a
man, nowadays.  But Mrs. Allonby is hardly a very suitable person.

HESTER.  I dislike Mrs. Allonby.  I dislike her more than I can say.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not sure, Miss Worsley, that foreigners like
yourself should cultivate likes or dislikes about the people they are
invited to meet.  Mrs. Allonby is very well born.  She is a niece of Lord
Brancaster’s.  It is said, of course, that she ran away twice before she
was married.  But you know how unfair people often are.  I myself don’t
believe she ran away more than once.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot is very charming.

LADY CAROLINE.  Ah, yes! the young man who has a post in a bank.  Lady
Hunstanton is most kind in asking him here, and Lord Illingworth seems to
have taken quite a fancy to him.  I am not sure, however, that Jane is
right in taking him out of his position.  In my young days, Miss Worsley,
one never met any one in society who worked for their living.  It was not
considered the thing.

HESTER.  In America those are the people we respect most.

LADY CAROLINE.  I have no doubt of it.

HESTER.  Mr. Arbuthnot has a beautiful nature!  He is so simple, so
sincere.  He has one of the most beautiful natures I have ever come
across.  It is a privilege to meet _him_.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is not customary in England, Miss Worsley, for a young
lady to speak with such enthusiasm of any person of the opposite sex.
English women conceal their feelings till after they are married.  They
show them then.

HESTER.  Do you, in England, allow no friendship to exist between a young
man and a young girl?

[_Enter_ LADY HUNSTANTON, _followed by Footman with shawls and a
cushion_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  We think it very inadvisable.  Jane, I was just saying
what a pleasant party you have asked us to meet.  You have a wonderful
power of selection.  It is quite a gift.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Caroline, how kind of you!  I think we all do fit
in very nicely together.  And I hope our charming American visitor will
carry back pleasant recollections of our English country life.  [_To
Footman_.]  The cushion, there, Francis.  And my shawl.  The Shetland.
Get the Shetland.  [_Exit Footman for shawl_.]

[_Enter_ GERALD ARBUTHNOT.]

GERALD.  Lady Hunstanton, I have such good news to tell you.  Lord
Illingworth has just offered to make me his secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  His secretary?  That is good news indeed, Gerald.  It
means a very brilliant future in store for you.  Your dear mother will be
delighted.  I really must try and induce her to come up here to-night.
Do you think she would, Gerald?  I know how difficult it is to get her to
go anywhere.

GERALD.  Oh!  I am sure she would, Lady Hunstanton, if she knew Lord
Illingworth had made me such an offer.

[_Enter Footman with shawl_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I will write and tell her about it, and ask her to come
up and meet him.  [_To Footman_.]  Just wait, Francis.  [_Writes
letter_.]

LADY CAROLINE.  That is a very wonderful opening for so young a man as
you are, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  It is indeed, Lady Caroline.  I trust I shall be able to show
myself worthy of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  I trust so.

GERALD.  [_To_ HESTER.]  _You_ have not congratulated me yet, Miss
Worsley.

HESTER.  Are you very pleased about it?

GERALD.  Of course I am.  It means everything to me—things that were out
of the reach of hope before may be within hope’s reach now.

HESTER.  Nothing should be out of the reach of hope.  Life is a hope.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I fancy, Caroline, that Diplomacy is what Lord
Illingworth is aiming at.  I heard that he was offered Vienna.  But that
may not be true.

LADY CAROLINE.  I don’t think that England should be represented abroad
by an unmarried man, Jane.  It might lead to complications.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are too nervous, Caroline.  Believe me, you are too
nervous.  Besides, Lord Illingworth may marry any day.  I was in hopes he
would have married lady Kelso.  But I believe he said her family was too
large.  Or was it her feet?  I forget which.  I regret it very much.  She
was made to be an ambassador’s wife.

LADY CAROLINE.  She certainly has a wonderful faculty of remembering
people’s names, and forgetting their faces.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, that is very natural, Caroline, is it not?  [_To
Footman_.]  Tell Henry to wait for an answer.  I have written a line to
your dear mother, Gerald, to tell her your good news, and to say she
really must come to dinner.

[_Exit Footman_.]

GERALD.  That is awfully kind of you, Lady Hunstanton.  [_To_ HESTER.]
Will you come for a stroll, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  With pleasure.  [_Exit with_ GERALD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am very much gratified at Gerald Arbuthnot’s good
fortune.  He is quite a _protégé_ of mine.  And I am particularly pleased
that Lord Illingworth should have made the offer of his own accord
without my suggesting anything.  Nobody likes to be asked favours.  I
remember poor Charlotte Pagden making herself quite unpopular one season,
because she had a French governess she wanted to recommend to every one.

LADY CAROLINE.  I saw the governess, Jane.  Lady Pagden sent her to me.
It was before Eleanor came out.  She was far too good-looking to be in
any respectable household.  I don’t wonder Lady Pagden was so anxious to
get rid of her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that explains it.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, the grass is too damp for you.  You had better go
and put on your overshoes at once.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline, I assure you.

LADY CAROLINE.  You must allow me to be the best judge of that, John.
Pray do as I tell you.

[SIR JOHN _gets up and goes off_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You spoil him, Caroline, you do indeed!

[_Enter_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

[_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]  Well, dear, I hope you like the park.  It is said
to be well timbered.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The trees are wonderful, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Quite, quite wonderful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But somehow, I feel sure that if I lived in the country
for six months, I should become so unsophisticated that no one would take
the slightest notice of me.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I assure you, dear, that the country has not that
effect at all.  Why, it was from Melthorpe, which is only two miles from
here, that Lady Belton eloped with Lord Fethersdale.  I remember the
occurrence perfectly.  Poor Lord Belton died three days afterwards of
joy, or gout.  I forget which.  We had a large party staying here at the
time, so we were all very much interested in the whole affair.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I think to elope is cowardly.  It’s running away from
danger.  And danger has become so rare in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can make out, the young women of the present
day seem to make it the sole object of their lives to be always playing
with fire.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The one advantage of playing with fire, Lady Caroline, is
that one never gets even singed.  It is the people who don’t know how to
play with it who get burned up.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; I see that.  It is very, very helpful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t know how the world would get on with such a
theory as that, dear Mrs. Allonby.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Ah!  The world was made for men and not for women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Stutfield.  We have a much better
time than they have.  There are far more things forbidden to us than are
forbidden to them.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; that is quite, quite true.  I had not thought of
that.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, Mr. Kelvil, have you got through your work?

KELVIL.  I have finished my writing for the day, Lady Hunstanton.  It has
been an arduous task.  The demands on the time of a public man are very
heavy nowadays, very heavy indeed.  And I don’t think they meet with
adequate recognition.

LADY CAROLINE.  John, have you got your overshoes on?

SIR JOHN.  Yes, my love.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think you had better come over here, John.  It is more
sheltered.

SIR JOHN.  I am quite comfortable, Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think not, John.  You had better sit beside me.  [SIR
JOHN _rises and goes across_.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been writing about this morning, Mr.
Kelvil?

KELVIL.  On the usual subject, Lady Stutfield.  On Purity.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That must be such a very, very interesting thing to
write about.

KELVIL.  It is the one subject of really national importance, nowadays,
Lady Stutfield.  I purpose addressing my constituents on the question
before Parliament meets.  I find that the poorer classes of this country
display a marked desire for a higher ethical standard.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How quite, quite nice of them.

LADY CAROLINE.  Are you in favour of women taking part in politics, Mr.
Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  The growing influence of women is the one reassuring thing in
our political life, Lady Caroline.  Women are always on the side of
morality, public and private.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It is so very, very gratifying to hear you say that.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes!—the moral qualities in women—that is the
important thing.  I am afraid, Caroline, that dear Lord Illingworth
doesn’t value the moral qualities in women as much as he should.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  The world says that Lord Illingworth is very, very
wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  But what world says that, Lady Stutfield?  It must be
the next world.  This world and I are on excellent terms.  [_Sits down
beside_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  Every one _I_ know says you are very, very wicked.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is perfectly monstrous the way people go about,
nowadays, saying things against one behind one’s back that are absolutely
and entirely true.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Dear Lord Illingworth is quite hopeless, Lady
Stutfield.  I have given up trying to reform him.  It would take a Public
Company with a Board of Directors and a paid Secretary to do that.  But
you have the secretary already, Lord Illingworth, haven’t you?  Gerald
Arbuthnot has told us of his good fortune; it is really most kind of you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, don’t say that, Lady Hunstanton.  Kind is a
dreadful word.  I took a great fancy to young Arbuthnot the moment I met
him, and he’ll be of considerable use to me in something I am foolish
enough to think of doing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  He is an admirable young man.  And his mother is one of
my dearest friends.  He has just gone for a walk with our pretty
American.  She is very pretty, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  Far too pretty.  These American girls carry off all the
good matches.  Why can’t they stay in their own country?  They are always
telling us it is the Paradise of women.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is, Lady Caroline.  That is why, like Eve, they are
so extremely anxious to get out of it.

LADY CAROLINE.  Who are Miss Worsley’s parents?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American women are wonderfully clever in concealing
their parents.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Lord Illingworth, what do you mean?  Miss
Worsley, Caroline, is an orphan.  Her father was a very wealthy
millionaire or philanthropist, or both, I believe, who entertained my son
quite hospitably, when he visited Boston.  I don’t know how he made his
money, originally.

KELVIL.  I fancy in American dry goods.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are American dry goods?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  American novels.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How very singular! . . . Well, from whatever source her
large fortune came, I have a great esteem for Miss Worsley.  She dresses
exceedingly well.  All Americans do dress well.  They get their clothes
in Paris.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They say, Lady Hunstanton, that when good Americans die
they go to Paris.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Indeed?  And when bad Americans die, where do they go
to?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, they go to America.

KELVIL.  I am afraid you don’t appreciate America, Lord Illingworth.  It
is a very remarkable country, especially considering its youth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The youth of America is their oldest tradition.  It
has been going on now for three hundred years.  To hear them talk one
would imagine they were in their first childhood.  As far as civilisation
goes they are in their second.

KELVIL.  There is undoubtedly a great deal of corruption in American
politics.  I suppose you allude to that?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I wonder.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Politics are in a sad way everywhere, I am told.  They
certainly are in England.  Dear Mr. Cardew is ruining the country.  I
wonder Mrs. Cardew allows him.  I am sure, Lord Illingworth, you don’t
think that uneducated people should be allowed to have votes?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I think they are the only people who should.

KELVIL.  Do you take no side then in modern politics, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never take sides in anything, Mr. Kelvil.
Taking sides is the beginning of sincerity, and earnestness follows
shortly afterwards, and the human being becomes a bore.  However, the
House of Commons really does very little harm.  You can’t make people
good by Act of Parliament,—that is something.

KELVIL.  You cannot deny that the House of Commons has always shown great
sympathy with the sufferings of the poor.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is its special vice.  That is the special vice of
the age.  One should sympathise with the joy, the beauty, the colour of
life.  The less said about life’s sores the better, Mr. Kelvil.

KELVIL.  Still our East End is a very important problem.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  It is the problem of slavery.  And we are
trying to solve it by amusing the slaves.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, a great deal may be done by means of cheap
entertainments, as you say, Lord Illingworth.  Dear Dr. Daubeny, our
rector here, provides, with the assistance of his curates, really
admirable recreations for the poor during the winter.  And much good may
be done by means of a magic lantern, or a missionary, or some popular
amusement of that kind.

LADY CAROLINE.  I am not at all in favour of amusements for the poor,
Jane.  Blankets and coals are sufficient.  There is too much love of
pleasure amongst the upper classes as it is.  Health is what we want in
modern life.  The tone is not healthy, not healthy at all.

KELVIL.  You are quite right, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  I believe I am usually right.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Horrid word ‘health.’

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Silliest word in our language, and one knows so well
the popular idea of health.  The English country gentleman galloping
after a fox—the unspeakable in full pursuit of the uneatable.

KELVIL.  May I ask, Lord Illingworth, if you regard the House of Lords as
a better institution than the House of Commons?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A much better institution, of course.  We in the House
of Lords are never in touch with public opinion.  That makes us a
civilised body.

KELVIL.  Are you serious in putting forward such a view?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite serious, Mr. Kelvil.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
Vulgar habit that is people have nowadays of asking one, after one has
given them an idea, whether one is serious or not.  Nothing is serious
except passion.  The intellect is not a serious thing, and never has
been.  It is an instrument on which one plays, that is all.  The only
serious form of intellect I know is the British intellect.  And on the
British intellect the illiterates play the drum.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What are you saying, Lord Illingworth, about the drum?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was merely talking to Mrs. Allonby about the leading
articles in the London newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you believe all that is written in the
newspapers?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do.  Nowadays it is only the unreadable that occurs.
[_Rises with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Are you going, Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Just as far as the conservatory.  Lord Illingworth told me
this morning that there was an orchid there as beautiful as the seven
deadly sins.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, I hope there is nothing of the kind.  I will
certainly speak to the gardener.

[_Exit_ MRS. ALLONBY _and_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Remarkable type, Mrs. Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She lets her clever tongue run away with her sometimes.

LADY CAROLINE.  Is that the only thing, Jane, Mrs. Allonby allows to run
away with her?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope so, Caroline, I am sure.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.]

Dear Lord Alfred, do join us.  [LORD ALFRED _sits down beside_ LADY
STUTFIELD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  You believe good of every one, Jane.  It is a great
fault.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really, really think, Lady Caroline, that one
should believe evil of every one?

LADY CAROLINE.  I think it is much safer to do so, Lady Stutfield.
Until, of course, people are found out to be good.  But that requires a
great deal of investigation nowadays.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But there is so much unkind scandal in modern life.

LADY CAROLINE.  Lord Illingworth remarked to me last night at dinner that
the basis of every scandal is an absolutely immoral certainty.

KELVIL.  Lord Illingworth is, of course, a very brilliant man, but he
seems to me to be lacking in that fine faith in the nobility and purity
of life which is so important in this century.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, quite, quite important, is it not?

KELVIL.  He gives me the impression of a man who does not appreciate the
beauty of our English home-life.  I would say that he was tainted with
foreign ideas on the subject.

LADY STUTFIELD.  There is nothing, nothing like the beauty of home-life,
is there?

KELVIL.  It is the mainstay of our moral system in England, Lady
Stutfield.  Without it we would become like our neighbours.

LADY STUTFIELD.  That would be so, so sad, would it not?

KELVIL.  I am afraid, too, that Lord Illingworth regards woman simply as
a toy.  Now, I have never regarded woman as a toy.  Woman is the
intellectual helpmeet of man in public as in private life.  Without her
we should forget the true ideals.  [_Sits down beside_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY STUTFIELD.  I am so very, very glad to hear you say that.

LADY CAROLINE.  You a married man, Mr. Kettle?

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, dear, Kelvil.

KELVIL.  I am married, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  Family?

KELVIL.  Yes.

LADY CAROLINE.  How many?

KELVIL.  Eight.

[LADY STUTFIELD _turns her attention to_ LORD ALFRED.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mrs. Kettle and the children are, I suppose, at the
seaside?  [SIR JOHN _shrugs his shoulders_.]

KELVIL.  My wife is at the seaside with the children, Lady Caroline.

LADY CAROLINE.  You will join them later on, no doubt?

KELVIL.  If my public engagements permit me.

LADY CAROLINE.  Your public life must be a great source of gratification
to Mrs. Kettle.

SIR JOHN.  Kelvil, my love, Kelvil.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_To_ LORD ALFRED.]  How very, very charming those
gold-tipped cigarettes of yours are, Lord Alfred.

LORD ALFRED.  They are awfully expensive.  I can only afford them when
I’m in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It must be terribly, terribly distressing to be in debt.

LORD ALFRED.  One must have some occupation nowadays.  If I hadn’t my
debts I shouldn’t have anything to think about.  All the chaps I know are
in debt.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But don’t the people to whom you owe the money give you
a great, great deal of annoyance?

[_Enter Footman_.]

LORD ALFRED.  Oh, no, they write; I don’t.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very strange.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, here is a letter, Caroline, from dear Mrs.
Arbuthnot.  She won’t dine.  I am so sorry.  But she will come in the
evening.  I am very pleased indeed.  She is one of the sweetest of women.
Writes a beautiful hand, too, so large, so firm.  [_Hands letter to_ LADY
CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Looking at it_.]  A little lacking in femininity, Jane.
Femininity is the quality I admire most in women.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Taking back letter and leaving it on table_.]  Oh!
she is very feminine, Caroline, and so good too.  You should hear what
the Archdeacon says of her.  He regards her as his right hand in the
parish.  [_Footman speaks to her_.]  In the Yellow Drawing-room.  Shall
we all go in?  Lady Stutfield, shall we go in to tea?

LADY STUTFIELD.  With pleasure, Lady Hunstanton.  [_They rise and proceed
to go off_.  SIR JOHN offers to carry LADY STUTFIELD’S cloak.]

LADY CAROLINE.  John!  If you would allow your nephew to look after Lady
Stutfield’s cloak, you might help me with my workbasket.

[_Enter_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

SIR JOHN.  Certainly, my love.  [_Exeunt_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Curious thing, plain women are always jealous of their
husbands, beautiful women never are!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Beautiful women never have time.  They are always so
occupied in being jealous of other people’s husbands.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should have thought Lady Caroline would have grown tired
of conjugal anxiety by this time!  Sir John is her fourth!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So much marriage is certainly not becoming.  Twenty
years of romance make a woman look like a ruin; but twenty years of
marriage make her something like a public building.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Twenty years of romance!  Is there such a thing?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Not in our day.  Women have become too brilliant.
Nothing spoils a romance so much as a sense of humour in the woman.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Or the want of it in the man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are quite right.  In a Temple every one should be
serious, except the thing that is worshipped.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And that should be man?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Women kneel so gracefully; men don’t.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You are thinking of Lady Stutfield!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I assure you I have not thought of Lady Stutfield for
the last quarter of an hour.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Is she such a mystery?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is more than a mystery—she is a mood.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Moods don’t last.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is their chief charm.

[_Enter_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, every one has been congratulating me, Lady
Hunstanton and Lady Caroline, and . . . every one.  I hope I shall make a
good secretary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You will be the pattern secretary, Gerald.  [_Talks to
him_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  You enjoy country life, Miss Worsley?

HESTER.  Very much indeed.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Don’t find yourself longing for a London dinner-party?

HESTER.  I dislike London dinner-parties.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I adore them.  The clever people never listen, and the
stupid people never talk.

HESTER.  I think the stupid people talk a great deal.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, I never listen!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy, if I didn’t like you I wouldn’t have made
you the offer.  It is because I like you so much that I want to have you
with me.

[_Exit_ HESTER _with_ GERALD.]

Charming fellow, Gerald Arbuthnot!

MRS. ALLONBY.  He is very nice; very nice indeed.  But I can’t stand the
American young lady.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why?

MRS. ALLONBY.  She told me yesterday, and in quite a loud voice too, that
she was only eighteen.  It was most annoying.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never trust a woman who tells one her real
age.  A woman who would tell one that, would tell one anything.

MRS. ALLONBY.  She is a Puritan besides—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah, that is inexcusable.  I don’t mind plain women
being Puritans.  It is the only excuse they have for being plain.  But
she is decidedly pretty.  I admire her immensely.  [_Looks steadfastly
at_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a thoroughly bad man you must be!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you call a bad man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  The sort of man who admires innocence.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And a bad woman?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh! the sort of woman a man never gets tired of.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You are severe—on yourself.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Define us as a sex.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Sphinxes without secrets.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Does that include the Puritan women?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do you know, I don’t believe in the existence of
Puritan women?  I don’t think there is a woman in the world who would not
be a little flattered if one made love to her.  It is that which makes
women so irresistibly adorable.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You think there is no woman in the world who would object
to being kissed?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Very few.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Miss Worsley would not let you kiss her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you sure?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Quite.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you think she’d do if I kissed her?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Either marry you, or strike you across the face with her
glove.  What would you do if she struck you across the face with her
glove?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Fall in love with her, probably.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then it is lucky you are not going to kiss her!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Is that a challenge?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is an arrow shot into the air.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t you know that I always succeed in whatever I
try?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I am sorry to hear it.  We women adore failures.  They
lean on us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You worship successes.  You cling to them.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We are the laurels to hide their baldness.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And they need you always, except at the moment of
triumph.

MRS. ALLONBY.  They are uninteresting then.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How tantalising you are!  [_A pause_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, there is one thing I shall always like
you for.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only one thing?  And I have so many bad qualities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, don’t be too conceited about them.  You may lose them
as you grow old.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I never intend to grow old.  The soul is born old but
grows young.  That is the comedy of life.

MRS. ALLONBY.  And the body is born young and grows old.  That is life’s
tragedy.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Its comedy also, sometimes.  But what is the
mysterious reason why you will always like me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is that you have never made love to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have never done anything else.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Really?  I have not noticed it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How fortunate!  It might have been a tragedy for both
of us.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We should each have survived.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One can survive everything nowadays, except death, and
live down anything except a good reputation.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Have you tried a good reputation?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of the many annoyances to which I have never
been subjected.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It may come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Why do you threaten me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I will tell you when you have kissed the Puritan.

[_Enter Footman_.]

FRANCIS.  Tea is served in the Yellow Drawing-room, my lord.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Tell her ladyship we are coming in.

FRANCIS.  Yes, my lord.

[_Exit_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Shall we go in to tea?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you like such simple pleasures?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I adore simple pleasures.  They are the last refuge of
the complex.  But, if you wish, let us stay here.  Yes, let us stay here.
The Book of Life begins with a man and a woman in a garden.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It ends with Revelations.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You fence divinely.  But the button has come of your
foil.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I have still the mask.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It makes your eyes lovelier.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Thank you.  Come.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT’S _letter on table_, _and takes
it up and looks at envelope_.]  What a curious handwriting!  It reminds
me of the handwriting of a woman I used to know years ago.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Who?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.  A woman of no
importance.  [_Throws letter down_, _and passes up the steps of the
terrace with_ MRS. ALLONBY.  _They smile at each other_.]

                                  SCENE

 _Drawing-room at Hunstanton_, _after dinner_, _lamps lit_.  _Door_ L.C.
                               _Door_ R.C.

[_Ladies seated on sofas_.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a comfort it is to have got rid of the men for a
little!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men persecute us dreadfully, don’t they?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Persecute us?  I wish they did.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  The annoying thing is that the wretches can be perfectly
happy without us.  That is why I think it is every woman’s duty never to
leave them alone for a single moment, except during this short breathing
space after dinner; without which I believe we poor women would be
absolutely worn to shadows.

[_Enter Servants with coffee_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Worn to shadows, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton.  It is such a strain keeping men up
to the mark.  They are always trying to escape from us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  It seems to me that it is we who are always trying to
escape from them.  Men are so very, very heartless.  They know their
power and use it.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  What stuff and nonsense
all this about men is!  The thing to do is to keep men in their proper
place.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But what is their proper place, Lady Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  Looking after their wives, Mrs. Allonby.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Takes coffee from Servant_.]  Really?  And if they’re
not married?

LADY CAROLINE.  If they are not married, they should be looking after a
wife.  It’s perfectly scandalous the amount of bachelors who are going
about society.  There should be a law passed to compel them all to marry
within twelve months.

LADY STUTFIELD.  [_Refuses coffee_.]  But if they’re in love with some
one who, perhaps, is tied to another?

LADY CAROLINE.  In that case, Lady Stutfield, they should be married off
in a week to some plain respectable girl, in order to teach them not to
meddle with other people’s property.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I don’t think that we should ever be spoken of as other
people’s property.  All men are married women’s property.  That is the
only true definition of what married women’s property really is.  But we
don’t belong to any one.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I am so very, very glad to hear you say so.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But do you really think, dear Caroline, that
legislation would improve matters in any way?  I am told that, nowadays,
all the married men live like bachelors, and all the bachelors like
married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I certainly never know one from the other.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh, I think one can always know at once whether a man
has home claims upon his life or not.  I have noticed a very, very sad
expression in the eyes of so many married men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, all that I have noticed is that they are horribly
tedious when they are good husbands, and abominably conceited when they
are not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, I suppose the type of husband has completely
changed since my young days, but I’m bound to state that poor dear
Hunstanton was the most delightful of creatures, and as good as gold.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, my husband is a sort of promissory note; I’m tired of
meeting him.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you renew him from time to time, don’t you?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh no, Lady Caroline.  I have only had one husband as yet.
I suppose you look upon me as quite an amateur.

LADY CAROLINE.  With your views on life I wonder you married at all.

MRS. ALLONBY.  So do I.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, I believe you are really very happy in
your married life, but that you like to hide your happiness from others.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I assure you I was horribly deceived in Ernest.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, I hope not, dear.  I knew his mother quite well.
She was a Stratton, Caroline, one of Lord Crowland’s daughters.

LADY CAROLINE.  Victoria Stratton?  I remember her perfectly.  A silly
fair-haired woman with no chin.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, Ernest has a chin.  He has a very strong chin, a
square chin.  Ernest’s chin is far too square.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But do you really think a man’s chin can be too square?
I think a man should look very, very strong, and that his chin should be
quite, quite square.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Then you should certainly know Ernest, Lady Stutfield.  It
is only fair to tell you beforehand he has got no conversation at all.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I adore silent men.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Ernest isn’t silent.  He talks the whole time.  But he
has got no conversation.  What he talks about I don’t know.  I haven’t
listened to him for years.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Have you never forgiven him then?  How sad that seems!
But all life is very, very sad, is it not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Life, Lady Stutfield, is simply a _mauvais quart d’heure_
made up of exquisite moments.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, there are moments, certainly.  But was it something
very, very wrong that Mr. Allonby did?  Did he become angry with you, and
say anything that was unkind or true?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh dear, no.  Ernest is invariably calm.  That is one of
the reasons he always gets on my nerves.  Nothing is so aggravating as
calmness.  There is something positively brutal about the good temper of
most modern men.  I wonder we women stand it as well as we do.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes; men’s good temper shows they are not so sensitive
as we are, not so finely strung.  It makes a great barrier often between
husband and wife, does it not?  But I would so much like to know what was
the wrong thing Mr. Allonby did.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Well, I will tell you, if you solemnly promise to tell
everybody else.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  I will make a point of repeating
it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  When Ernest and I were engaged, he swore to me positively
on his knees that he had never loved any one before in the whole course
of his life.  I was very young at the time, so I didn’t believe him, I
needn’t tell you.  Unfortunately, however, I made no enquiries of any
kind till after I had been actually married four or five months.  I found
out then that what he had told me was perfectly true.  And that sort of
thing makes a man so absolutely uninteresting.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Men always want to be a woman’s first love.  That is their
clumsy vanity.  We women have a more subtle instinct about things.  What
we like is to be a man’s last romance.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I see what you mean.  It’s very, very beautiful.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear child, you don’t mean to tell me that you won’t
forgive your husband because he never loved any one else?  Did you ever
hear such a thing, Caroline?  I am quite surprised.

LADY CAROLINE.  Oh, women have become so highly educated, Jane, that
nothing should surprise us nowadays, except happy marriages.  They
apparently are getting remarkably rare.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, they’re quite out of date.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Except amongst the middle classes, I have been told.

MRS. ALLONBY.  How like the middle classes!

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes—is it not?—very, very like them.

LADY CAROLINE.  If what you tell us about the middle classes is true,
Lady Stutfield, it redounds greatly to their credit.  It is much to be
regretted that in our rank of life the wife should be so persistently
frivolous, under the impression apparently that it is the proper thing to
be.  It is to that I attribute the unhappiness of so many marriages we
all know of in society.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Do you know, Lady Caroline, I don’t think the frivolity of
the wife has ever anything to do with it. More marriages are ruined
nowadays by the common sense of the husband than by anything else.  How
can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating
her as if she were a perfectly rational being?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  Man, poor, awkward, reliable, necessary man belongs to a
sex that has been rational for millions and millions of years.  He can’t
help himself.  It is in his race.  The History of Woman is very
different.  We have always been picturesque protests against the mere
existence of common sense.  We saw its dangers from the first.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, the common sense of husbands is certainly most,
most trying.  Do tell me your conception of the Ideal Husband.  I think
it would be so very, very helpful.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The Ideal Husband?  There couldn’t be such a thing.  The
institution is wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The Ideal Man, then, in his relations to _us_.

LADY CAROLINE.  He would probably be extremely realistic.

MRS. CAROLINE.  The Ideal Man!  Oh, the Ideal Man should talk to us as if
we were goddesses, and treat us as if we were children.  He should refuse
all our serious requests, and gratify every one of our whims.  He should
encourage us to have caprices, and forbid us to have missions.  He should
always say much more than he means, and always mean much more than he
says.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But how could he do both, dear?

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should never run down other pretty women.  That would
show he had no taste, or make one suspect that he had too much.  No; he
should be nice about them all, but say that somehow they don’t attract
him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Yes, that is always very, very pleasant to hear about
other women.

MRS. ALLONBY.  If we ask him a question about anything, he should give us
an answer all about ourselves.  He should invariably praise us for
whatever qualities he knows we haven’t got.  But he should be pitiless,
quite pitiless, in reproaching us for the virtues that we have never
dreamed of possessing.  He should never believe that we know the use of
useful things.  That would be unforgiveable.  But he should shower on us
everything we don’t want.

LADY CAROLINE.  As far as I can see, he is to do nothing but pay bills
and compliments.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He should persistently compromise us in public, and treat
us with absolute respect when we are alone.  And yet he should be always
ready to have a perfectly terrible scene, whenever we want one, and to
become miserable, absolutely miserable, at a moment’s notice, and to
overwhelm us with just reproaches in less than twenty minutes, and to be
positively violent at the end of half an hour, and to leave us for ever
at a quarter to eight, when we have to go and dress for dinner.  And
when, after that, one has seen him for really the last time, and he has
refused to take back the little things he has given one, and promised
never to communicate with one again, or to write one any foolish letters,
he should be perfectly broken-hearted, and telegraph to one all day long,
and send one little notes every half-hour by a private hansom, and dine
quite alone at the club, so that every one should know how unhappy he
was.  And after a whole dreadful week, during which one has gone about
everywhere with one’s husband, just to show how absolutely lonely one
was, he may be given a third last parting, in the evening, and then, if
his conduct has been quite irreproachable, and one has behaved really
badly to him, he should be allowed to admit that he has been entirely in
the wrong, and when he has admitted that, it becomes a woman’s duty to
forgive, and one can do it all over again from the beginning, with
variations.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How clever you are, my dear!  You never mean a single
word you say.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Thank you, thank you.  It has been quite, quite
entrancing.  I must try and remember it all.  There are such a number of
details that are so very, very important.

LADY CAROLINE.  But you have not told us yet what the reward of the Ideal
Man is to be.

MRS. ALLONBY.  His reward?  Oh, infinite expectation.  That is quite
enough for him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  But men are so terribly, terribly exacting, are they
not?

MRS. ALLONBY.  That makes no matter.  One should never surrender.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Not even to the Ideal Man?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Certainly not to him.  Unless, of course, one wants to
grow tired of him.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Oh! . . . yes.  I see that.  It is very, very helpful.
Do you think, Mrs. Allonby, I shall ever meet the Ideal Man?  Or are
there more than one?

MRS. ALLONBY.  There are just four in London, Lady Stutfield.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, my dear!

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Going over to her_.]  What has happened?  Do tell me.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_in a low voice_]  I had completely forgotten that the
American young lady has been in the room all the time.  I am afraid some
of this clever talk may have shocked her a little.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that will do her so much good!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Let us hope she didn’t understand much.  I think I had
better go over and talk to her.  [_Rises and goes across to_ HESTER
WORSLEY.]  Well, dear Miss Worsley. [_Sitting down beside her_.]  How
quiet you have been in your nice little corner all this time!  I suppose
you have been reading a book?  There are so many books here in the
library.

HESTER.  No, I have been listening to the conversation.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You mustn’t believe everything that was said, you know,
dear.

HESTER.  I didn’t believe any of it

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That is quite right, dear.

HESTER.  [_Continuing_.]  I couldn’t believe that any women could really
hold such views of life as I have heard to-night from some of your
guests.  [_An awkward pause_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hear you have such pleasant society in America.
Quite like our own in places, my son wrote to me.

HESTER.  There are cliques in America as elsewhere, Lady Hunstanton.  But
true American society consists simply of all the good women and good men
we have in our country.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What a sensible system, and I dare say quite pleasant
too.  I am afraid in England we have too many artificial social barriers.
We don’t see as much as we should of the middle and lower classes.

HESTER.  In America we have no lower classes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a very strange arrangement!

MRS. ALLONBY.  What is that dreadful girl talking about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  She is painfully natural, is she not?

LADY CAROLINE.  There are a great many things you haven’t got in America,
I am told, Miss Worsley.  They say you have no ruins, and no curiosities.

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_To_ LADY STUTFIELD.]  What nonsense!  They have their
mothers and their manners.

HESTER.  The English aristocracy supply us with our curiosities, Lady
Caroline.  They are sent over to us every summer, regularly, in the
steamers, and propose to us the day after they land.  As for ruins, we
are trying to build up something that will last longer than brick or
stone.  [_Gets up to take her fan from table_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What is that, dear?  Ah, yes, an iron Exhibition, is it
not, at that place that has the curious name?

HESTER.  [_Standing by table_.]  We are trying to build up life, Lady
Hunstanton, on a better, truer, purer basis than life rests on here.
This sounds strange to you all, no doubt.  How could it sound other than
strange?  You rich people in England, you don’t know how you are living.
How could you know?  You shut out from your society the gentle and the
good.  You laugh at the simple and the pure.  Living, as you all do, on
others and by them, you sneer at self-sacrifice, and if you throw bread
to the poor, it is merely to keep them quiet for a season.  With all your
pomp and wealth and art you don’t know how to live—you don’t even know
that.  You love the beauty that you can see and touch and handle, the
beauty that you can destroy, and do destroy, but of the unseen beauty of
life, of the unseen beauty of a higher life, you know nothing.  You have
lost life’s secret.  Oh, your English society seems to me shallow,
selfish, foolish.  It has blinded its eyes, and stopped its ears.  It
lies like a leper in purple.  It sits like a dead thing smeared with
gold.  It is all wrong, all wrong.

LADY STUTFIELD.  I don’t think one should know of these things.  It is
not very, very nice, is it?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Miss Worsley, I thought you liked English
society so much.  You were such a success in it.  And you were so much
admired by the best people.  I quite forget what Lord Henry Weston said
of you—but it was most complimentary, and you know what an authority he
is on beauty.

HESTER.  Lord Henry Weston!  I remember him, Lady Hunstanton.  A man with
a hideous smile and a hideous past.  He is asked everywhere.  No
dinner-party is complete without him.  What of those whose ruin is due to
him?  They are outcasts.  They are nameless.  If you met them in the
street you would turn your head away.  I don’t complain of their
punishment.  Let all women who have sinned be punished.

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters from terrace behind in a cloak with a lace veil
over her head_.  _She hears the last words and starts_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady!

HESTER.  It is right that they should be punished, but don’t let them be
the only ones to suffer.  If a man and woman have sinned, let them both
go forth into the desert to love or loathe each other there.  Let them
both be branded.  Set a mark, if you wish, on each, but don’t punish the
one and let the other go free.  Don’t have one law for men and another
for women.  You are unjust to women in England.  And till you count what
is a shame in a woman to be an infamy in a man, you will always be
unjust, and Right, that pillar of fire, and Wrong, that pillar of cloud,
will be made dim to your eyes, or be not seen at all, or if seen, not
regarded.

LADY CAROLINE.  Might I, dear Miss Worsley, as you are standing up, ask
you for my cotton that is just behind you?  Thank you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Mrs. Arbuthnot!  I am so pleased you have come
up.  But I didn’t hear you announced.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, I came straight in from the terrace, Lady Hunstanton,
just as I was.  You didn’t tell me you had a party.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Not a party.  Only a few guests who are staying in the
house, and whom you must know.  Allow me.  [_Tries to help her_.  _Rings
bell_.]  Caroline, this is Mrs. Arbuthnot, one of my sweetest friends.
Lady Caroline Pontefract, Lady Stutfield, Mrs. Allonby, and my young
American friend, Miss Worsley, who has just been telling us all how
wicked we are.

HESTER.  I am afraid you think I spoke too strongly, Lady Hunstanton.
But there are some things in England—

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear young lady, there was a great deal of truth, I
dare say, in what you said, and you looked very pretty while you said it,
which is much more important, Lord Illingworth would tell us.  The only
point where I thought you were a little hard was about Lady Caroline’s
brother, about poor Lord Henry.  He is really such good company.

[_Enter Footman_.]

Take Mrs. Arbuthnot’s things.

[_Exit Footman with wraps_.]

HESTER.  Lady Caroline, I had no idea it was your brother.  I am sorry
for the pain I must have caused you—I—

LADY CAROLINE.  My dear Miss Worsley, the only part of your little
speech, if I may so term it, with which I thoroughly agreed, was the part
about my brother.  Nothing that you could possibly say could be too bad
for him.  I regard Henry as infamous, absolutely infamous.  But I am
bound to state, as you were remarking, Jane, that he is excellent
company, and he has one of the best cooks in London, and after a good
dinner one can forgive anybody, even one’s own relations.

LADY HUNSTANTON [_to_ MISS WORSLEY]  Now, do come, dear, and make friends
with Mrs. Arbuthnot.  She is one of the good, sweet, simple people you
told us we never admitted into society.  I am sorry to say Mrs. Arbuthnot
comes very rarely to me.  But that is not my fault.

MRS. ALLONBY.  What a bore it is the men staying so long after dinner!  I
expect they are saying the most dreadful things about us.

LADY STUTFIELD.  Do you really think so?

MRS. ALLONBY.  I was sure of it.

LADY STUTFIELD.  How very, very horrid of them!  Shall we go onto the
terrace?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, anything to get away from the dowagers and the
dowdies.  [_Rises and goes with_ LADY STUTFIELD _to door_ L.C.]  We are
only going to look at the stars, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You will find a great many, dear, a great many.  But
don’t catch cold.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  We shall all miss Gerald so
much, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But has Lord Illingworth really offered to make Gerald
his secretary?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Oh, yes!  He has been most charming about it.  He has
the highest possible opinion of your boy.  You don’t know Lord
Illingworth, I believe, dear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have never met him.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You know him by name, no doubt?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am afraid I don’t.  I live so much out of the world,
and see so few people.  I remember hearing years ago of an old Lord
Illingworth who lived in Yorkshire, I think.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, yes.  That would be the last Earl but one.  He was
a very curious man.  He wanted to marry beneath him.  Or wouldn’t, I
believe.  There was some scandal about it.  The present Lord Illingworth
is quite different.  He is very distinguished.  He does—well, he does
nothing, which I am afraid our pretty American visitor here thinks very
wrong of anybody, and I don’t know that he cares much for the subjects in
which you are so interested, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot.  Do you think,
Caroline, that Lord Illingworth is interested in the Housing of the Poor?

LADY CAROLINE.  I should fancy not at all, Jane.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  We all have our different tastes, have we not?  But
Lord Illingworth has a very high position, and there is nothing he
couldn’t get if he chose to ask for it.  Of course, he is comparatively a
young man still, and he has only come to his title within—how long
exactly is it, Caroline, since Lord Illingworth succeeded?

LADY CAROLINE.  About four years, I think, Jane.  I know it was the same
year in which my brother had his last exposure in the evening newspapers.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I remember.  That would be about four years ago.
Of course, there were a great many people between the present Lord
Illingworth and the title, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  There was—who was there,
Caroline?

LADY CAROLINE.  There was poor Margaret’s baby.  You remember how anxious
she was to have a boy, and it was a boy, but it died, and her husband
died shortly afterwards, and she married almost immediately one of Lord
Ascot’s sons, who, I am told, beats her.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, that is in the family, dear, that is in the family.
And there was also, I remember, a clergyman who wanted to be a lunatic,
or a lunatic who wanted to be a clergyman, I forget which, but I know the
Court of Chancery investigated the matter, and decided that he was quite
sane.  And I saw him afterwards at poor Lord Plumstead’s with straws in
his hair, or something very odd about him.  I can’t recall what.  I often
regret, Lady Caroline, that dear Lady Cecilia never lived to see her son
get the title.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Cecilia?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Lord Illingworth’s mother, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, was one
of the Duchess of Jerningham’s pretty daughters, and she married Sir
Thomas Harford, who wasn’t considered a very good match for her at the
time, though he was said to be the handsomest man in London.  I knew them
all quite intimately, and both the sons, Arthur and George.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was the eldest son who succeeded, of course, Lady
Hunstanton?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  No, dear, he was killed in the hunting field.  Or was
it fishing, Caroline?  I forget.  But George came in for everything.  I
always tell him that no younger son has ever had such good luck as he has
had.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lady Hunstanton, I want to speak to Gerald at once.
Might I see him?  Can he be sent for?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Certainly, dear.  I will send one of the servants into
the dining-room to fetch him.  I don’t know what keeps the gentlemen so
long.  [_Rings bell_.]  When I knew Lord Illingworth first as plain
George Harford, he was simply a very brilliant young man about town, with
not a penny of money except what poor dear Lady Cecilia gave him.  She
was quite devoted to him.  Chiefly, I fancy, because he was on bad terms
with his father.  Oh, here is the dear Archdeacon.  [_To Servant_.]  It
doesn’t matter.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ DOCTOR DAUBENY.  SIR JOHN _goes over to_ LADY
STUTFIELD, DOCTOR DAUBENY _to_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

THE ARCHDEACON.  Lord Illingworth has been most entertaining.  I have
never enjoyed myself more.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_To_ DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  You see I have got Mrs.
Arbuthnot to come to me at last.

THE ARCHDEACON.  That is a great honour, Lady Hunstanton.  Mrs. Daubeny
will be quite jealous of you.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am so sorry Mrs. Daubeny could not come with you
to-night.  Headache as usual, I suppose.

THE ARCHDEACON.  Yes, Lady Hunstanton; a perfect martyr.  But she is
happiest alone.  She is happiest alone.

LADY CAROLINE.  [_To her husband_.]  John!  [SIR JOHN _goes over to his
wife_.  DOCTOR BAUBENY _talks to_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT watches LORD ILLINGWORTH the whole time.  He has passed
across the room without noticing her, and approaches MRS. ALLONBY, who
with LADY STUTFIELD is standing by the door looking on to the terrace.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How is the most charming woman in the world?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [Taking LADY STUTFIELD by the hand.]  We are both quite
well, thank you, Lord Illingworth.  But what a short time you have been
in the dining-room!  It seems as if we had only just left.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was bored to death.  Never opened my lips the whole
time.  Absolutely longing to come in to you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You should have.  The American girl has been giving us a
lecture.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Really?  All Americans lecture, I believe.  I suppose
it is something in their climate.  What did she lecture about?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Oh, Puritanism, of course.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am going to convert her, am I not?  How long do you
give me?

MRS. ALLONBY.  A week.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A week is more than enough.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_Going to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Dear mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, I don’t feel at all well.  See me home, Gerald.
I shouldn’t have come.

GERALD.  I am so sorry, mother.  Certainly.  But you must know Lord
Illingworth first.  [_Goes across room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Not to-night, Gerald.

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth, I want you so much to know my mother.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  With the greatest pleasure.  [_To_ MRS. ALLONBY.]
I’ll be back in a moment.  People’s mothers always bore me to death.  All
women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy.

MRS. ALLONBY.  No man does.  That is his.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a delightful mood you are in to-night!  [_Turns
round and goes across with_ GERALD _to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  _When he sees
her_, _he starts back in wonder_.  _Then slowly his eyes turn towards_
GERALD.]

GERALD.  Mother, this is Lord Illingworth, who has offered to take me as
his private secretary.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _bows coldly_.]  It is a
wonderful opening for me, isn’t it?  I hope he won’t be disappointed in
me, that is all.  You’ll thank Lord Illingworth, mother, won’t you?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth in very good, I am sure, to interest
himself in you for the moment.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Putting his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  Oh,
Gerald and I are great friends already, Mrs . . . Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There can be nothing in common between you and my son,
Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  Dear mother, how can you say so?  Of course Lord Illingworth is
awfully clever and that sort of thing.  There is nothing Lord Illingworth
doesn’t know.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear boy!

GERALD.  He knows more about life than any one I have ever met.  I feel
an awful duffer when I am with you, Lord Illingworth.  Of course, I have
had so few advantages.  I have not been to Eton or Oxford like other
chaps.  But Lord Illingworth doesn’t seem to mind that.  He has been
awfully good to me, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth may change his mind.  He may not really
want you as his secretary.

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You must remember, as you said yourself, you have had so
few advantages.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth, I want to speak to you for a moment.  Do
come over.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Will you excuse me, Mrs. Arbuthnot?  Now, don’t let
your charming mother make any more difficulties, Gerald.  The thing is
quite settled, isn’t it?

GERALD.  I hope so.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _goes across to_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  I thought you were never going to leave the lady in black
velvet.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  She is excessively handsome.  [_Looks at_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Caroline, shall we all make a move to the music-room?
Miss Worsley is going to play.  You’ll come too, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot,
won’t you?  You don’t know what a treat is in store for you.  [_To_
DOCTOR BAUBENY.]  I must really take Miss Worsley down some afternoon to
the rectory.  I should so much like dear Mrs. Daubeny to hear her on the
violin.  Ah, I forgot.  Dear Mrs. Daubeny’s hearing is a little
defective, is it not?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Her deafness is a great privation to her.  She can’t
even hear my sermons now.  She reads them at home.  But she has many
resources in herself, many resources.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She reads a good deal, I suppose?

THE ARCHDEACON.  Just the very largest print.  The eyesight is rapidly
going.  But she’s never morbid, never morbid.

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  Do speak to my mother, Lord
Illingworth, before you go into the music-room.  She seems to think,
somehow, you don’t mean what you said to me.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Aren’t you coming?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  In a few moments.  Lady Hunstanton, if Mrs. Arbuthnot
would allow me, I would like to say a few words to her, and we will join
you later on.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, of course.  You will have a great deal to say to
her, and she will have a great deal to thank you for.  It is not every
son who gets such an offer, Mrs. Arbuthnot.  But I know you appreciate
that, dear.

LADY CAROLINE.  John!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, don’t keep Mrs. Arbuthnot too long, Lord
Illingworth.  We can’t spare her.

[_Exit following the other guests_.  _Sound of violin heard from
music-room_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So that is our son, Rachel!  Well, I am very proud of
him.  He in a Harford, every inch of him.  By the way, why Arbuthnot,
Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  One name is as good as another, when one has no right to
any name.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose so—but why Gerald?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  After a man whose heart I broke—after my father.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Well, Rachel, what in over is over.  All I have got to
say now in that I am very, very much pleased with our boy.  The world
will know him merely as my private secretary, but to me he will be
something very near, and very dear.  It is a curious thing, Rachel; my
life seemed to be quite complete.  It was not so.  It lacked something,
it lacked a son.  I have found my son now, I am glad I have found him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You have no right to claim him, or the smallest part of
him.  The boy is entirely mine, and shall remain mine.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, you have had him to yourself for over
twenty years.  Why not let me have him for a little now?  He is quite as
much mine as yours.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Are you talking of the child you abandoned?  Of the
child who, as far as you are concerned, might have died of hunger and of
want?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You forget, Rachel, it was you who left me.  It was
not I who left you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I left you because you refused to give the child a name.
Before my son was born, I implored you to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I had no expectations then.  And besides, Rachel, I
wasn’t much older than you were.  I was only twenty-two.  I was
twenty-one, I believe, when the whole thing began in your father’s
garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  When a man is old enough to do wrong he should be old
enough to do right also.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, intellectual generalities are always
interesting, but generalities in morals mean absolutely nothing.  As for
saying I left our child to starve, that, of course, is untrue and silly.
My mother offered you six hundred a year.  But you wouldn’t take
anything.  You simply disappeared, and carried the child away with you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I wouldn’t have accepted a penny from her.  Your father
was different.  He told you, in my presence, when we were in Paris, that
it was your duty to marry me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh, duty is what one expects from others, it is not
what one does oneself.  Of course, I was influenced by my mother.  Every
man is when he is young.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am glad to hear you say so.  Gerald shall certainly
not go away with you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What nonsense, Rachel!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Do you think I would allow my son—

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  _Our_ son.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son [LORD ILLINGWORTH _shrugs his shoulders_]—to go
away with the man who spoiled my youth, who ruined my life, who has
tainted every moment of my days?  You don’t realise what my past has been
in suffering and in shame.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Rachel, I must candidly say that I think
Gerald’s future considerably more important than your past.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald cannot separate his future from my past.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is exactly what he should do.  That is exactly
what you should help him to do.  What a typical woman you are!  You talk
sentimentally, and you are thoroughly selfish the whole time.  But don’t
let us have a scene.  Rachel, I want you to look at this matter from the
common-sense point of view, from the point of view of what is best for
our son, leaving you and me out of the question.  What is our son at
present?  An underpaid clerk in a small Provincial Bank in a third-rate
English town.  If you imagine he is quite happy in such a position, you
are mistaken.  He is thoroughly discontented.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He was not discontented till he met you.  You have made
him so.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Of course, I made him so.  Discontent is the first
step in the progress of a man or a nation.  But I did not leave him with
a mere longing for things he could not get.  No, I made him a charming
offer.  He jumped at it, I need hardly say.  Any young man would.  And
now, simply because it turns out that I am the boy’s own father and he my
own son, you propose practically to ruin his career.  That is to say, if
I were a perfect stranger, you would allow Gerald to go away with me, but
as he is my own flesh and blood you won’t.  How utterly illogical you
are!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not allow him to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How can you prevent it?  What excuse can you give to
him for making him decline such an offer as mine?  I won’t tell him in
what relations I stand to him, I need hardly say.  But you daren’t tell
him.  You know that.  Look how you have brought him up.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have brought him up to be a good man.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Quite so.  And what is the result?  You have educated
him to be your judge if he ever finds you out.  And a bitter, an unjust
judge he will be to you.  Don’t be deceived, Rachel.  Children begin by
loving their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely, if ever, do
they forgive them.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  George, don’t take my son away from me.  I have had
twenty years of sorrow, and I have only had one thing to love me, only
one thing to love.  You have had a life of joy, and pleasure, and
success.  You have been quite happy, you have never thought of us.  There
was no reason, according to your views of life, why you should have
remembered us at all.  Your meeting us was a mere accident, a horrible
accident.  Forget it.  Don’t come now, and rob me of . . . of all I have
in the whole world.  You are so rich in other things.  Leave me the
little vineyard of my life; leave me the walled-in garden and the well of
water; the ewe-lamb God sent me, in pity or in wrath, oh! leave me that.
George, don’t take Gerald from me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, at the present moment you are not necessary to
Gerald’s career; I am.  There is nothing more to be said on the subject.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not let him go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Here is Gerald.  He has a right to decide for himself.

[_Enter_ GERALD.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother, I hope you have settled it all with Lord
Illingworth?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have not, Gerald.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother seems not to like your coming with me, for
some reason.

GERALD.  Why, mother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I thought you were quite happy here with me, Gerald.  I
didn’t know you were so anxious to leave me.

GERALD.  Mother, how can you talk like that?  Of course I have been quite
happy with you.  But a man can’t stay always with his mother.  No chap
does.  I want to make myself a position, to do something.  I thought you
would have been proud to see me Lord Illingworth’s secretary.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not think you would be suitable as a private
secretary to Lord Illingworth.  You have no qualifications.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t wish to seem to interfere for a moment, Mrs.
Arbuthnot, but as far as your last objection is concerned, I surely am
the best judge.  And I can only tell you that your son has all the
qualifications I had hoped for.  He has more, in fact, than I had even
thought of.  Far more.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _remains silent_.]  Have you any
other reason, Mrs. Arbuthnot, why you don’t wish your son to accept this
post?

GERALD.  Have you, mother?  Do answer.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you have, Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray, pray say it.  We
are quite by ourselves here.  Whatever it is, I need not say I will not
repeat it.

GERALD.  Mother?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  If you would like to be alone with your son, I will
leave you.  You may have some other reason you don’t wish me to hear.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have no other reason.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then, my dear boy, we may look on the thing as
settled.  Come, you and I will smoke a cigarette on the terrace together.
And Mrs. Arbuthnot, pray let me tell you, that I think you have acted
very, very wisely.

[_Exit with_ GERALD.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is left alone_.  _She stands
immobile with a look of unutterable sorrow on her face_.]

                                 SCENE

    _The Picture Gallery at Hunstanton_.  _Door at back leading on to
                                terrace_.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _and_ GERALD, R.C.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _lolling on a
sofa_.  GERALD _in a chair_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Thoroughly sensible woman, your mother, Gerald.  I
knew she would come round in the end.

GERALD.  My mother is awfully conscientious, Lord Illingworth, and I know
she doesn’t think I am educated enough to be your secretary.  She is
perfectly right, too.  I was fearfully idle when I was at school, and I
couldn’t pass an examination now to save my life.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  My dear Gerald, examinations are of no value
whatsoever.  If a man is a gentleman, he knows quite enough, and if he is
not a gentleman, whatever he knows is bad for him.

GERALD.  But I am so ignorant of the world, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Don’t be afraid, Gerald.  Remember that you’ve got on
your side the most wonderful thing in the world—youth!  There is nothing
like youth.  The middle-aged are mortgaged to Life.  The old are in
life’s lumber-room.  But youth is the Lord of Life.  Youth has a kingdom
waiting for it.  Every one is born a king, and most people die in exile,
like most kings.  To win back my youth, Gerald, there is nothing I
wouldn’t do—except take exercise, get up early, or be a useful member of
the community.

GERALD.  But you don’t call yourself old, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am old enough to be your father, Gerald.

GERALD.  I don’t remember my father; he died years ago.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So Lady Hunstanton told me.

GERALD.  It is very curious, my mother never talks to me about my father.
I sometimes think she must have married beneath her.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces slightly_.]  Really?  [_Goes over and puts
his hand on_ GERALD’S _shoulder_.]  You have missed not having a father,
I suppose, Gerald?

GERALD.  Oh, no; my mother has been so good to me.  No one ever had such
a mother as I have had.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am quite sure of that.  Still I should imagine that
most mothers don’t quite understand their sons.  Don’t realise, I mean,
that a son has ambitions, a desire to see life, to make himself a name.
After all, Gerald, you couldn’t be expected to pass all your life in such
a hole as Wrockley, could you?

GERALD.  Oh, no!  It would be dreadful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  A mother’s love is very touching, of course, but it is
often curiously selfish.  I mean, there is a good deal of selfishness in
it.

GERALD.  [_Slowly_.]  I suppose there is.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Your mother is a thoroughly good woman.  But good
women have such limited views of life, their horizon is so small, their
interests are so petty, aren’t they?

GERALD.  They are awfully interested, certainly, in things we don’t care
much about.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose your mother is very religious, and that sort
of thing.

GERALD.  Oh, yes, she’s always going to church.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Ah! she is not modern, and to be modern is the only
thing worth being nowadays.  You want to be modern, don’t you, Gerald?
You want to know life as it really is.  Not to be put of with any
old-fashioned theories about life.  Well, what you have to do at present
is simply to fit yourself for the best society.  A man who can dominate a
London dinner-table can dominate the world.  The future belongs to the
dandy.  It is the exquisites who are going to rule.

GERALD.  I should like to wear nice things awfully, but I have always
been told that a man should not think too much about his clothes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  People nowadays are so absolutely superficial that
they don’t understand the philosophy of the superficial.  By the way,
Gerald, you should learn how to tie your tie better.  Sentiment is all
very well for the button-hole.  But the essential thing for a necktie is
style.  A well-tied tie is the first serious step in life.

GERALD.  [_Laughing_.]  I might be able to learn how to tie a tie, Lord
Illingworth, but I should never be able to talk as you do.  I don’t know
how to talk.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Oh! talk to every woman as if you loved her, and to
every man as if he bored you, and at the end of your first season you
will have the reputation of possessing the most perfect social tact.

GERALD.  But it is very difficult to get into society isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To get into the best society, nowadays, one has either
to feed people, amuse people, or shock people—that is all!

GERALD.  I suppose society is wonderfully delightful!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  To be in it is merely a bore.  But to be out of it
simply a tragedy.  Society is a necessary thing.  No man has any real
success in this world unless he has got women to back him, and women rule
society.  If you have not got women on your side you are quite over.  You
might just as well be a barrister, or a stockbroker, or a journalist at
once.

GERALD.  It is very difficult to understand women, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You should never try to understand them.  Women are
pictures.  Men are problems.  If you want to know what a woman really
means—which, by the way, is always a dangerous thing to do—look at her,
don’t listen to her.

GERALD.  But women are awfully clever, aren’t they?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always tell them so.  But, to the
philosopher, my dear Gerald, women represent the triumph of matter over
mind—just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals.

GERALD.  How then can women have so much power as you say they have?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The history of women is the history of the worst form
of tyranny the world has ever known.  The tyranny of the weak over the
strong.  It is the only tyranny that lasts.

GERALD.  But haven’t women got a refining influence?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Nothing refines but the intellect.

GERALD.  Still, there are many different kinds of women, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Only two kinds in society: the plain and the coloured.

GERALD.  But there are good women in society, aren’t there?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Far too many.

GERALD.  But do you think women shouldn’t be good?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should never tell them so, they’d all become good
at once.  Women are a fascinatingly wilful sex.  Every woman is a rebel,
and usually in wild revolt against herself.

GERALD.  You have never been married, Lord Illingworth, have you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Men marry because they are tired; women because they
are curious.  Both are disappointed.

GERALD.  But don’t you think one can be happy when one is married?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Perfectly happy.  But the happiness of a married man,
my dear Gerald, depends on the people he has not married.

GERALD.  But if one is in love?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  One should always be in love.  That is the reason one
should never marry.

GERALD.  Love is a very wonderful thing, isn’t it?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  When one is in love one begins by deceiving oneself.
And one ends by deceiving others.  That is what the world calls a
romance.  But a really _grande passion_ is comparatively rare nowadays.
It is the privilege of people who have nothing to do.  That is the one
use of the idle classes in a country, and the only possible explanation
of us Harfords.

GERALD.  Harfords, Lord Illingworth?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  That is my family name.  You should study the Peerage,
Gerald.  It is the one book a young man about town should know
thoroughly, and it is the best thing in fiction the English have ever
done.  And now, Gerald, you are going into a perfectly new life with me,
and I want you to know how to live.  [MRS. ARBUTHNOT _appears on terrace
behind_.]  For the world has been made by fools that wise men should live
in it!

[_Enter_ L.C. LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ DR. DAUBENY.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! here you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  Well, I
suppose you have been telling our young friend, Gerald, what his new
duties are to be, and giving him a great deal of good advice over a
pleasant cigarette.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been giving him the best of advice, Lady
Hunstanton, and the best of cigarettes.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so sorry I was not here to listen to you, but I
suppose I am too old now to learn.  Except from you, dear Archdeacon,
when you are in your nice pulpit.  But then I always know what you are
going to say, so I don’t feel alarmed.  [_Sees_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Ah!
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, do come and join us.  Come, dear.  [_Enter_ MRS.
ARBUTHNOT.]  Gerald has been having such a long talk with Lord
Illingworth; I am sure you must feel very much flattered at the pleasant
way in which everything has turned out for him.  Let us sit down.  [_They
sit down_.]  And how is your beautiful embroidery going on?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I am always at work, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Mrs. Daubeny embroiders a little, too, doesn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She was very deft with her needle once, quite a Dorcas.
But the gout has crippled her fingers a good deal.  She has not touched
the tambour frame for nine or ten years.  But she has many other
amusements.  She is very much interested in her own health.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that is always a nice distraction, in it not?  Now,
what are you talking about, Lord Illingworth?  Do tell us.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was on the point of explaining to Gerald that the
world has always laughed at its own tragedies, that being the only way in
which it has been able to bear them.  And that, consequently, whatever
the world has treated seriously belongs to the comedy side of things.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now I am quite out of my depth.  I usually am when Lord
Illingworth says anything.  And the Humane Society is most careless.
They never rescue me.  I am left to sink.  I have a dim idea, dear Lord
Illingworth, that you are always on the side of the sinners, and I know I
always try to be on the side of the saints, but that is as far as I get.
And after all, it may be merely the fancy of a drowning person.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The only difference between the saint and the sinner
is that every saint has a past, and every sinner has a future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! that quite does for me.  I haven’t a word to say.
You and I, dear Mrs. Arbuthnot, are behind the age.  We can’t follow Lord
Illingworth.  Too much care was taken with our education, I am afraid.
To have been well brought up is a great drawback nowadays.  It shuts one
out from so much.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I should be sorry to follow Lord Illingworth in any of
his opinions.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You are quite right, dear.

[GERALD _shrugs his shoulders and looks irritably over at his mother_.
_Enter_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Jane, have you seen John anywhere?

LADY HUNSTANTON.  You needn’t be anxious about him, dear.  He is with
Lady Stutfield; I saw them some time ago, in the Yellow Drawing-room.
They seem quite happy together.  You are not going, Caroline?  Pray sit
down.

LADY CAROLINE.  I think I had better look after John.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It doesn’t do to pay men so much attention.  And
Caroline has really nothing to be anxious about.  Lady Stutfield is very
sympathetic.  She is just as sympathetic about one thing as she is about
another.  A beautiful nature.

[_Enter_ SIR JOHN _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

Ah! here is Sir John!  And with Mrs. Allonby too!  I suppose it was Mrs.
Allonby I saw him with.  Sir John, Caroline has been looking everywhere
for you.

MRS. ALLONBY.  We have been waiting for her in the Music-room, dear Lady
Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! the Music-room, of course.  I thought it was the
Yellow Drawing-room, my memory is getting so defective.  [_To the_
ARCHDEACON.]  Mrs. Daubeny has a wonderful memory, hasn’t she?

THE ARCHDEACON.  She used to be quite remarkable for her memory, but
since her last attack she recalls chiefly the events of her early
childhood.  But she finds great pleasure in such retrospections, great
pleasure.

[_Enter_ LADY STUTFIELD _and_ MR. KELVIL.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! dear Lady Stutfield! and what has Mr. Kelvil been
talking to you about?

LADY STUTFIELD.  About Bimetallism, as well as I remember.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Bimetallism!  Is that quite a nice subject?  However, I
know people discuss everything very freely nowadays.  What did Sir John
talk to you about, dear Mrs. Allonby?

MRS. ALLONBY.  About Patagonia.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Really?  What a remote topic!  But very improving, I
have no doubt.

MRS. ALLONBY.  He has been most interesting on the subject of Patagonia.
Savages seem to have quite the same views as cultured people on almost
all subjects.  They are excessively advanced.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What do they do?

MRS. ALLONBY.  Apparently everything.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, it is very gratifying, dear Archdeacon, is it
not, to find that Human Nature is permanently one.—On the whole, the
world is the same world, is it not?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The world is simply divided into two classes—those who
believe the incredible, like the public—and those who do the improbable—

MRS. ALLONBY.  Like yourself?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Yes; I am always astonishing myself.  It is the only
thing that makes life worth living.

LADY STUTFIELD.  And what have you been doing lately that astonishes you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I have been discovering all kinds of beautiful
qualities in my own nature.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah! don’t become quite perfect all at once.  Do it
gradually!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t intend to grow perfect at all.  At least, I
hope I shan’t.  It would be most inconvenient.  Women love us for our
defects.  If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything,
even our gigantic intellects.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It is premature to ask us to forgive analysis.  We forgive
adoration; that is quite as much as should be expected from us.

[_Enter_ LORD ALFRED.  _He joins_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! we women should forgive everything, shouldn’t we,
dear Mrs. Arbuthnot?  I am sure you agree with me in that.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not, Lady Hunstanton.  I think there are many
things women should never forgive.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  What sort of things?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The ruin of another woman’s life.

[_Moves slowly away to back of stage_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah! those things are very sad, no doubt, but I believe
there are admirable homes where people of that kind are looked after and
reformed, and I think on the whole that the secret of life is to take
things very, very easily.

MRS. ALLONBY.  The secret of life is never to have an emotion that is
unbecoming.

LADY STUTFIELD.  The secret of life is to appreciate the pleasure of
being terribly, terribly deceived.

KELVIL.  The secret of life is to resist temptation, Lady Stutfield.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  There is no secret of life.  Life’s aim, if it has
one, is simply to be always looking for temptations.  There are not
nearly enough.  I sometimes pass a whole day without coming across a
single one.  It is quite dreadful.  It makes one so nervous about the
future.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Shakes her fan at him_.]  I don’t know how it is,
dear Lord Illingworth, but everything you have said to-day seems to me
excessively immoral.  It has been most interesting, listening to you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  All thought is immoral.  Its very essence is
destruction.  If you think of anything, you kill it.  Nothing survives
being thought of.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I don’t understand a word, Lord Illingworth.  But I
have no doubt it is all quite true.  Personally, I have very little to
reproach myself with, on the score of thinking.  I don’t believe in women
thinking too much.  Women should think in moderation, as they should do
all things in moderation.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Moderation is a fatal thing, Lady Hunstanton.  Nothing
succeeds like excess.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I hope I shall remember that.  It sounds an admirable
maxim.  But I’m beginning to forget everything.  It’s a great misfortune.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is one of your most fascinating qualities, Lady
Hunstanton.  No woman should have a memory.  Memory in a woman is the
beginning of dowdiness.  One can always tell from a woman’s bonnet
whether she has got a memory or not.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  How charming you are, dear Lord Illingworth.  You
always find out that one’s most glaring fault is one’s most important
virtue.  You have the most comforting views of life.

[_Enter_ FARQUHAR.]

FARQUHAR.  Doctor Daubeny’s carriage!

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear Archdeacon!  It is only half-past ten.

THE ARCHDEACON.  [_Rising_.]  I am afraid I must go, Lady Hunstanton.
Tuesday is always one of Mrs. Daubeny’s bad nights.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  Well, I won’t keep you from her.  [_Goes
with him towards door_.]  I have told Farquhar to put a brace of
partridge into the carriage.  Mrs. Daubeny may fancy them.

THE ARCHDEACON.  It is very kind of you, but Mrs. Daubeny never touches
solids now.  Lives entirely on jellies.  But she is wonderfully cheerful,
wonderfully cheerful.  She has nothing to complain of.

[_Exit with_ LADY HUNSTANTON.]

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Goes over to_ LORD ILLINGWORTH.]  There is a beautiful
moon to-night.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Let us go and look at it.  To look at anything that is
inconstant is charming nowadays.

MRS. ALLONBY.  You have your looking-glass.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is unkind.  It merely shows me my wrinkles.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Mine is better behaved.  It never tells me the truth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then it is in love with you.

[_Exeunt_ SIR JOHN, LADY STUTFIELD, MR. KELVIL _and_ LORD ALFRED.]

GERALD.  [_To_ LORD ILLINGWORTH]  May I come too?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do, my dear boy.  [_Moves towards with_ MRS. ALLONBY
_and_ GERALD.]

[LADY CAROLINE _enters_, _looks rapidly round and goes off in opposite
direction to that taken by_ SIR JOHN _and_ LADY STUTFIELD.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  What, mother!

[_Exit_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _with_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is getting late.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  My dear mother.  Do let us wait a little longer.  Lord
Illingworth is so delightful, and, by the way, mother, I have a great
surprise for you.  We are starting for India at the end of this month.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let us go home.

GERALD.  If you really want to, of course, mother, but I must bid
good-bye to Lord Illingworth first.  I’ll be back in five minutes.
[_Exit_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let him leave me if he chooses, but not with him—not
with him!  I couldn’t bear it.  [_Walks up and down_.]

[_Enter_ HESTER.]

HESTER.  What a lovely night it is, Mrs. Arbuthnot.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Is it?

HESTER.  Mrs. Arbuthnot, I wish you would let us be friends.  You are so
different from the other women here.  When you came into the Drawing-room
this evening, somehow you brought with you a sense of what is good and
pure in life.  I had been foolish.  There are things that are right to
say, but that may be said at the wrong time and to the wrong people.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I heard what you said.  I agree with it, Miss Worsley.

HESTER.  I didn’t know you had heard it.  But I knew you would agree with
me.  A woman who has sinned should be punished, shouldn’t she?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  She shouldn’t be allowed to come into the society of good men
and women?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  She should not.

HESTER.  And the man should be punished in the same way?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  In the same way.  And the children, if there are
children, in the same way also?

HESTER.  Yes, it is right that the sins of the parents should be visited
on the children.  It is a just law.  It is God’s law.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is one of God’s terrible laws.

[_Moves away to fireplace_.]

HESTER.  You are distressed about your son leaving you, Mrs. Arbuthnot?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

HESTER.  Do you like him going away with Lord Illingworth?  Of course
there is position, no doubt, and money, but position and money are not
everything, are they?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  They are nothing; they bring misery.

HESTER.  Then why do you let your son go with him?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He wishes it himself.

HESTER.  But if you asked him he would stay, would he not?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He has set his heart on going.

HESTER.  He couldn’t refuse you anything.  He loves you too much.  Ask
him to stay.  Let me send him in to you.  He is on the terrace at this
moment with Lord Illingworth.  I heard them laughing together as I passed
through the Music-room.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t trouble, Miss Worsley, I can wait.  It is of no
consequence.

HESTER.  No, I’ll tell him you want him.  Do—do ask him to stay.  [_Exit_
HESTER.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He won’t come—I know he won’t come.

[Enter LADY CAROLINE.  _She looks round anxiously_.  _Enter_ GERALD.]

LADY CAROLINE.  Mr. Arbuthnot, may I ask you is Sir John anywhere on the
terrace?

GERALD.  No, Lady Caroline, he is not on the terrace.

LADY CAROLINE.  It is very curious.  It is time for him to retire.

[_Exit_ LADY CAROLINE.]

GERALD.  Dear mother, I am afraid I kept you waiting.  I forgot all about
it.  I am so happy to-night, mother; I have never been so happy.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  At the prospect of going away?

GERALD.  Don’t put it like that, mother.  Of course I am sorry to leave
you.  Why, you are the best mother in the whole world.  But after all, as
Lord Illingworth says, it is impossible to live in such a place as
Wrockley.  You don’t mind it.  But I’m ambitions; I want something more
than that.  I want to have a career.  I want to do something that will
make you proud of me, and Lord Illingworth is going to help me.  He is
going to do everything for me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, don’t go away with Lord Illingworth.  I implore
you not to.  Gerald, I beg you!

GERALD.  Mother, how changeable you are!  You don’t seem to know your own
mind for a single moment.  An hour and a half ago in the Drawing-room you
agreed to the whole thing; now you turn round and make objections, and
try to force me to give up my one chance in life.  Yes, my one chance.
You don’t suppose that men like Lord Illingworth are to be found every
day, do you, mother?  It is very strange that when I have had such a
wonderful piece of good luck, the one person to put difficulties in my
way should be my own mother.  Besides, you know, mother, I love Hester
Worsley.  Who could help loving her?  I love her more than I have ever
told you, far more.  And if I had a position, if I had prospects, I
could—I could ask her to—Don’t you understand now, mother, what it means
to me to be Lord Illingworth’s secretary?  To start like that is to find
a career ready for one—before one—waiting for one.  If I were Lord
Illingworth’s secretary I could ask Hester to be my wife.  As a wretched
bank clerk with a hundred a year it would be an impertinence.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I fear you need have no hopes of Miss Worsley.  I know
her views on life.  She has just told them to me.  [_A pause_.]

GERALD.  Then I have my ambition left, at any rate.  That is something—I
am glad I have that!  You have always tried to crush my ambition,
mother—haven’t you?  You have told me that the world is a wicked place,
that success is not worth having, that society is shallow, and all that
sort of thing—well, I don’t believe it, mother.  I think the world must
be delightful.  I think society must be exquisite.  I think success is a
thing worth having.  You have been wrong in all that you taught me,
mother, quite wrong.  Lord Illingworth is a successful man.  He is a
fashionable man.  He is a man who lives in the world and for it.  Well, I
would give anything to be just like Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I would sooner see you dead.

GERALD.  Mother, what is your objection to Lord Illingworth?  Tell
me—tell me right out.  What is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is a bad man.

GERALD.  In what way bad?  I don’t understand what you mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will tell you.

GERALD.  I suppose you think him bad, because he doesn’t believe the same
things as you do.  Well, men are different from women, mother.  It is
natural that they should have different views.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is not what Lord Illingworth believes, or what he
does not believe, that makes him bad.  It is what he is.

GERALD.  Mother, is it something you know of him?  Something you actually
know?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is something I know.

GERALD.  Something you are quite sure of?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Quite sure of.

GERALD.  How long have you known it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For twenty years.

GERALD.  Is it fair to go back twenty years in any man’s career?  And
what have you or I to do with Lord Illingworth’s early life?  What
business is it of ours?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What this man has been, he is now, and will be always.

GERALD.  Mother, tell me what Lord Illingworth did?  If he did anything
shameful, I will not go away with him.  Surely you know me well enough
for that?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, come near to me.  Quite close to me, as you used
to do when you were a little boy, when you were mother’s own boy.
[GERALD _sits down betide his mother_.  _She runs her fingers through his
hair_, _and strokes his hands_.]  Gerald, there was a girl once, she was
very young, she was little over eighteen at the time.  George
Harford—that was Lord Illingworth’s name then—George Harford met her.
She knew nothing about life.  He—knew everything.  He made this girl love
him.  He made her love him so much that she left her father’s house with
him one morning.  She loved him so much, and he had promised to marry
her!  He had solemnly promised to marry her, and she had believed him.
She was very young, and—and ignorant of what life really is.  But he put
the marriage off from week to week, and month to month.—She trusted in
him all the while.  She loved him.—Before her child was born—for she had
a child—she implored him for the child’s sake to marry her, that the
child might have a name, that her sin might not be visited on the child,
who was innocent.  He refused.  After the child was born she left him,
taking the child away, and her life was ruined, and her soul ruined, and
all that was sweet, and good, and pure in her ruined also.  She suffered
terribly—she suffers now.  She will always suffer.  For her there is no
joy, no peace, no atonement.  She is a woman who drags a chain like a
guilty thing.  She is a woman who wears a mask, like a thing that is a
leper.  The fire cannot purify her.  The waters cannot quench her
anguish.  Nothing can heal her! no anodyne can give her sleep! no poppies
forgetfulness!  She is lost!  She is a lost soul!—That is why I call Lord
Illingworth a bad man.  That is why I don’t want my boy to be with him.

GERALD.  My dear mother, it all sounds very tragic, of course.  But I
dare say the girl was just as much to blame as Lord Illingworth
was.—After all, would a really nice girl, a girl with any nice feelings
at all, go away from her home with a man to whom she was not married, and
live with him as his wife?  No nice girl would.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_After a pause_.]  Gerald, I withdraw all my
objections.  You are at liberty to go away with Lord Illingworth, when
and where you choose.

GERALD.  Dear mother, I knew you wouldn’t stand in my way.  You are the
best woman God ever made.  And, as for Lord Illingworth, I don’t believe
he is capable of anything infamous or base.  I can’t believe it of him—I
can’t.

HESTER.  [_Outside_.]  Let me go!  Let me go!  [_Enter_ HESTER _in
terror_, _and rushes over to_ GERALD _and flings herself in his arms_.]

HESTER.  Oh! save me—save me from him!

GERALD.  From whom?

HESTER.  He has insulted me!  Horribly insulted me!  Save me!

GERALD.  Who?  Who has dared—?

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters at back of stage_.  HESTER _breaks from_
GERALD’S _arms and points to him_.]

GERALD  [_He is quite beside himself with rage and indignation_.]  Lord
Illingworth, you have insulted the purest thing on God’s earth, a thing
as pure as my own mother.  You have insulted the woman I love most in the
world with my own mother.  As there is a God in Heaven, I will kill you!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rushing across and catching hold of him_]  No! no!

GERALD.  [_Thrusting her back_.]  Don’t hold me, mother.  Don’t hold
me—I’ll kill him!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald!

GERALD.  Let me go, I say!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Stop, Gerald, stop!  He is your own father!

[GERALD _clutches his mother’s hands and looks into her face_.  _She
sinks slowly on the ground in shame_.  HESTER _steals towards the door_.
LORD ILLINGWORTH _frowns and bites his lip_.  _After a time_ GERALD
_raises his mother up_, _puts his am round her_, _and leads her from the
room_.]

                                  SCENE

_Sitting-room at Mrs. Arbuthnot’s_.  _Large open French window at back_,
_looking on to garden_.  _Doors_ R.C. _and_ L.C.

[GERALD ARBUTHNOT _writing at table_.]

[_Enter_ ALICE R.C. _followed by_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.]

ALICE.  Lady Hunstanton and Mrs. Allonby.

[_Exit_ L.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Good morning, Gerald.

GERALD.  [_Rising_.]  Good morning, Lady Hunstanton.  Good morning, Mrs.
Allonby.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Sitting down_.]  We came to inquire for your dear
mother, Gerald.  I hope she is better?

GERALD.  My mother has not come down yet, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Ah, I am afraid the heat was too much for her last
night.  I think there must have been thunder in the air.  Or perhaps it
was the music.  Music makes one feel so romantic—at least it always gets
on one’s nerves.

MRS. ALLONBY.  It’s the same thing, nowadays.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  I am so glad I don’t know what you mean, dear.  I am
afraid you mean something wrong.  Ah, I see you’re examining Mrs.
Arbuthnot’s pretty room.  Isn’t it nice and old-fashioned?

MRS. ALLONBY.  [_Surveying the room through her lorgnette_.]  It looks
quite the happy English home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  That’s just the word, dear; that just describes it.
One feels your mother’s good influence in everything she has about her,
Gerald.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Lord Illingworth says that all influence is bad, but that
a good influence is the worst in the world.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  When Lord Illingworth knows Mrs. Arbuthnot better he
will change his mind.  I must certainly bring him here.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I should like to see Lord Illingworth in a happy English
home.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  It would do him a great deal of good, dear.  Most women
in London, nowadays, seem to furnish their rooms with nothing but
orchids, foreigners, and French novels.  But here we have the room of a
sweet saint.  Fresh natural flowers, books that don’t shock one, pictures
that one can look at without blushing.

MRS. ALLONBY.  But I like blushing.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, there _is_ a good deal to be said for blushing,
if one can do it at the proper moment.  Poor dear Hunstanton used to tell
me I didn’t blush nearly often enough.  But then he was so very
particular.  He wouldn’t let me know any of his men friends, except those
who were over seventy, like poor Lord Ashton: who afterwards, by the way,
was brought into the Divorce Court.  A most unfortunate case.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I delight in men over seventy.  They always offer one the
devotion of a lifetime.  I think seventy an ideal age for a man.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  She is quite incorrigible, Gerald, isn’t she?
By-the-by, Gerald, I hope your dear mother will come and see me more
often now.  You and Lord Illingworth start almost immediately, don’t you?

GERALD.  I have given up my intention of being Lord Illingworth’s
secretary.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Surely not, Gerald!  It would be most unwise of you.
What reason can you have?

GERALD.  I don’t think I should be suitable for the post.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I wish Lord Illingworth would ask me to be his secretary.
But he says I am not serious enough.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, you really mustn’t talk like that in this
house.  Mrs. Arbuthnot doesn’t know anything about the wicked society in
which we all live.  She won’t go into it.  She is far too good.  I
consider it was a great honour her coming to me last night.  It gave
quite an atmosphere of respectability to the party.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Ah, that must have been what you thought was thunder in
the air.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  My dear, how can you say that?  There is no resemblance
between the two things at all.  But really, Gerald, what do you mean by
not being suitable?

GERALD.  Lord Illingworth’s views of life and mine are too different.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  But, my dear Gerald, at your age you shouldn’t have any
views of life.  They are quite out of place.  You must be guided by
others in this matter.  Lord Illingworth has made you the most flattering
offer, and travelling with him you would see the world—as much of it, at
least, as one should look at—under the best auspices possible, and stay
with all the right people, which is so important at this solemn moment in
your career.

GERALD.  I don’t want to see the world: I’ve seen enough of it.

MRS. ALLONBY.  I hope you don’t think you have exhausted life, Mr.
Arbuthnot.  When a man says that, one knows that life has exhausted him.

GERALD.  I don’t wish to leave my mother.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Now, Gerald, that is pure laziness on your part.  Not
leave your mother!  If I were your mother I would insist on your going.

[_Enter_ ALICE L.C.]

ALICE.  Mrs. Arbuthnot’s compliments, my lady, but she has a bad
headache, and cannot see any one this morning.  [_Exit_ R.C.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Rising_.]  A bad headache!  I am so sorry!  Perhaps
you’ll bring her up to Hunstanton this afternoon, if she is better,
Gerald.

GERALD.  I am afraid not this afternoon, Lady Hunstanton.

LADY HUNSTANTON.  Well, to-morrow, then.  Ah, if you had a father,
Gerald, he wouldn’t let you waste your life here.  He would send you off
with Lord Illingworth at once.  But mothers are so weak.  They give up to
their sons in everything.  We are all heart, all heart.  Come, dear, I
must call at the rectory and inquire for Mrs. Daubeny, who, I am afraid,
is far from well.  It is wonderful how the Archdeacon bears up, quite
wonderful.  He is the most sympathetic of husbands.  Quite a model.
Good-bye, Gerald, give my fondest love to your mother.

MRS. ALLONBY.  Good-bye, Mr. Arbuthnot.

GERALD.  Good-bye.

[_Exit_ LADY HUNSTANTON _and_ MRS. ALLONBY.  GERALD _sits down and reads
over his letter_.]

GERALD.  What name can I sign?  I, who have no right to any name.
[_Signs name_, _puts letter into envelope_, _addresses it_, _and is about
to seal it_, _when door_ L.C. _opens and_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT _enters_.
GERALD _lays down sealing-wax_.  _Mother and son look at each other_.]

LADY HUNSTANTON.  [_Through French window at the back_.]  Good-bye again,
Gerald.  We are taking the short cut across your pretty garden.  Now,
remember my advice to you—start at once with Lord Illingworth.

MRS. ALLONBY.  _Au revoir_, Mr. Arbuthnot.  Mind you bring me back
something nice from your travels—not an Indian shawl—on no account an
Indian shawl.

[_Exeunt_.]

GERALD.  Mother, I have just written to him.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  To whom?

GERALD.  To my father.  I have written to tell him to come here at four
o’clock this afternoon.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He shall not come here.  He shall not cross the
threshold of my house.

GERALD.  He must come.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Gerald, if you are going away with Lord Illingworth, go
at once.  Go before it kills me: but don’t ask me to meet him.

GERALD.  Mother, you don’t understand.  Nothing in the world would induce
me to go away with Lord Illingworth, or to leave you.  Surely you know me
well enough for that.  No: I have written to him to say—

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What can you have to say to him?

GERALD.  Can’t you guess, mother, what I have written in this letter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

GERALD.  Mother, surely you can.  Think, think what must be done, now, at
once, within the next few days.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is nothing to be done.

GERALD.  I have written to Lord Illingworth to tell him that he must
marry you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Marry me?

GERALD.  Mother, I will force him to do it.  The wrong that has been done
you must be repaired.  Atonement must be made.  Justice may be slow,
mother, but it comes in the end.  In a few days you shall be Lord
Illingworth’s lawful wife.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald—

GERALD.  I will insist upon his doing it.  I will make him do it: he will
not dare to refuse.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But, Gerald, it is I who refuse.  I will not marry Lord
Illingworth.

GERALD.  Not marry him?  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  But you don’t understand: it is for your sake I am talking, not
for mine.  This marriage, this necessary marriage, this marriage which
for obvious reasons must inevitably take place, will not help me, will
not give me a name that will be really, rightly mine to bear.  But surely
it will be something for you, that you, my mother, should, however late,
become the wife of the man who is my father.  Will not that be something?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not marry him.

GERALD.  Mother, you must.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I will not.  You talk of atonement for a wrong done.
What atonement can be made to me?  There is no atonement possible.  I am
disgraced: he is not.  That is all.  It is the usual history of a man and
a woman as it usually happens, as it always happens.  And the ending is
the ordinary ending.  The woman suffers.  The man goes free.

GERALD.  I don’t know if that is the ordinary ending, mother: I hope it
is not.  But your life, at any rate, shall not end like that.  The man
shall make whatever reparation is possible.  It is not enough.  It does
not wipe out the past, I know that.  But at least it makes the future
better, better for you, mother.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I refuse to marry Lord Illingworth.

GERALD.  If he came to you himself and asked you to be his wife you would
give him a different answer.  Remember, he is my father.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  If he came himself, which he will not do, my answer
would be the same.  Remember I am your mother.

GERALD.  Mother, you make it terribly difficult for me by talking like
that; and I can’t understand why you won’t look at this matter from the
right, from the only proper standpoint.  It is to take away the
bitterness out of your life, to take away the shadow that lies on your
name, that this marriage must take place.  There is no alternative: and
after the marriage you and I can go away together.  But the marriage must
take place first.  It is a duty that you owe, not merely to yourself, but
to all other women—yes: to all the other women in the world, lest he
betray more.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I owe nothing to other women.  There is not one of them
to help me.  There is not one woman in the world to whom I could go for
pity, if I would take it, or for sympathy, if I could win it.  Women are
hard on each other.  That girl, last night, good though she is, fled from
the room as though I were a tainted thing.  She was right.  I am a
tainted thing.  But my wrongs are my own, and I will bear them alone.  I
must bear them alone.  What have women who have not sinned to do with me,
or I with them?  We do not understand each other.

[_Enter_ HESTER _behind_.]

GERALD.  I implore you to do what I ask you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What son has ever asked of his mother to make so hideous
a sacrifice?  None.

GERALD.  What mother has ever refused to marry the father of her own
child?  None.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Let me be the first, then.  I will not do it.

GERALD.  Mother, you believe in religion, and you brought me up to
believe in it also.  Well, surely your religion, the religion that you
taught me when I was a boy, mother, must tell you that I am right.  You
know it, you feel it.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I do not know it.  I do not feel it, nor will I ever
stand before God’s altar and ask God’s blessing on so hideous a mockery
as a marriage between me and George Harford.  I will not say the words
the Church bids us to say.  I will not say them.  I dare not.  How could
I swear to love the man I loathe, to honour him who wrought you
dishonour, to obey him who, in his mastery, made me to sin?  No: marriage
is a sacrament for those who love each other.  It is not for such as him,
or such as me.  Gerald, to save you from the world’s sneers and taunts I
have lied to the world.  For twenty years I have lied to the world.  I
could not tell the world the truth.  Who can, ever?  But not for my own
sake will I lie to God, and in God’s presence.  No, Gerald, no ceremony,
Church-hallowed or State-made, shall ever bind me to George Harford.  It
may be that I am too bound to him already, who, robbing me, yet left me
richer, so that in the mire of my life I found the pearl of price, or
what I thought would be so.

GERALD.  I don’t understand you now.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Men don’t understand what mothers are.  I am no
different from other women except in the wrong done me and the wrong I
did, and my very heavy punishments and great disgrace.  And yet, to bear
you I had to look on death.  To nurture you I had to wrestle with it.
Death fought with me for you.  All women have to fight with death to keep
their children.  Death, being childless, wants our children from us.
Gerald, when you were naked I clothed you, when you were hungry I gave
you food.  Night and day all that long winter I tended you.  No office is
too mean, no care too lowly for the thing we women love—and oh! how _I_
loved _you_.  Not Hannah, Samuel more.  And you needed love, for you were
weakly, and only love could have kept you alive.  Only love can keep any
one alive.  And boys are careless often and without thinking give pain,
and we always fancy that when they come to man’s estate and know us
better they will repay us.  But it is not so.  The world draws them from
our side, and they make friends with whom they are happier than they are
with us, and have amusements from which we are barred, and interests that
are not ours: and they are unjust to us often, for when they find life
bitter they blame us for it, and when they find it sweet we do not taste
its sweetness with them . . . You made many friends and went into their
houses and were glad with them, and I, knowing my secret, did not dare to
follow, but stayed at home and closed the door, shut out the sun and sat
in darkness.  What should I have done in honest households?  My past was
ever with me. . . . And you thought I didn’t care for the pleasant things
of life.  I tell you I longed for them, but did not dare to touch them,
feeling I had no right.  You thought I was happier working amongst the
poor.  That was my mission, you imagined.  It was not, but where else was
I to go?  The sick do not ask if the hand that smooths their pillow is
pure, nor the dying care if the lips that touch their brow have known the
kiss of sin.  It was you I thought of all the time; I gave to them the
love you did not need: lavished on them a love that was not theirs . . .
And you thought I spent too much of my time in going to Church, and in
Church duties.  But where else could I turn?  God’s house is the only
house where sinners are made welcome, and you were always in my heart,
Gerald, too much in my heart.  For, though day after day, at morn or
evensong, I have knelt in God’s house, I have never repented of my sin.
How could I repent of my sin when you, my love, were its fruit!  Even now
that you are bitter to me I cannot repent.  I do not.  You are more to me
than innocence.  I would rather be your mother—oh! much rather!—than have
been always pure . . . Oh, don’t you see? don’t you understand?  It is my
dishonour that has made you so dear to me.  It is my disgrace that has
bound you so closely to me.  It is the price I paid for you—the price of
soul and body—that makes me love you as I do.  Oh, don’t ask me to do
this horrible thing.  Child of my shame, be still the child of my shame!

GERALD.  Mother, I didn’t know you loved me so much as that.  And I will
be a better son to you than I have been.  And you and I must never leave
each other . . . but, mother . . . I can’t help it . . . you must become
my father’s wife.  You must marry him.  It is your duty.

HESTER.  [_Running forwards and embracing_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  No, no; you
shall not.  That would be real dishonour, the first you have ever known.
That would be real disgrace: the first to touch you.  Leave him and come
with me.  There are other countries than England . . . Oh! other
countries over sea, better, wiser, and less unjust lands.  The world is
very wide and very big.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No, not for me.  For me the world is shrivelled to a
palm’s breadth, and where I walk there are thorns.

HESTER.  It shall not be so.  We shall somewhere find green valleys and
fresh waters, and if we weep, well, we shall weep together.  Have we not
both loved him?

GERALD.  Hester!

HESTER.  [_Waving him back_.]  Don’t, don’t!  You cannot love me at all,
unless you love her also.  You cannot honour me, unless she’s holier to
you.  In her all womanhood is martyred.  Not she alone, but all of us are
stricken in her house.

GERALD.  Hester, Hester, what shall I do?

HESTER.  Do you respect the man who is your father?

GERALD.  Respect him?  I despise him!  He is infamous.

HESTER.  I thank you for saving me from him last night.

GERALD.  Ah, that is nothing.  I would die to save you.  But you don’t
tell me what to do now!

HESTER.  Have I not thanked you for saving _me_?

GERALD.  But what should I do?

HESTER.  Ask your own heart, not mine.  I never had a mother to save, or
shame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He is hard—he is hard.  Let me go away.

GERALD.  [_Rushes over and kneels down bedside his mother_.]  Mother,
forgive me: I have been to blame.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t kiss my hands: they are cold.  My heart is cold:
something has broken it.

HESTER.  Ah, don’t say that.  Hearts live by being wounded.  Pleasure may
turn a heart to stone, riches may make it callous, but sorrow—oh, sorrow
cannot break it.  Besides, what sorrows have you now?  Why, at this
moment you are more dear to him than ever, _dear_ though you have _been_,
and oh! how dear you _have_ been always.  Ah! be kind to him.

GERALD.  You are my mother and my father all in one.  I need no second
parent.  It was for you I spoke, for you alone.  Oh, say something,
mother.  Have I but found one love to lose another?  Don’t tell me that.
O mother, you are cruel.  [_Gets up and flings himself sobbing on a
sofa_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_To_ HESTER.]  But has he found indeed another love?

HESTER.  You know I have loved him always.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are very poor.

HESTER.  Who, being loved, is poor?  Oh, no one.  I hate my riches.  They
are a burden.  Let him share it with me.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  But we are disgraced.  We rank among the outcasts Gerald
is nameless.  The sins of the parents should be visited on the children.
It is God’s law.

HESTER.  I was wrong.  God’s law is only Love.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Rises_, _and taking_ HESTER _by the hand_, _goes
slowly over to where_ GERALD _is lying on the sofa with his head buried
in his hands_.  _She touches him and he looks up_.]  Gerald, I cannot
give you a father, but I have brought you a wife.

GERALD.  Mother, I am not worthy either of her or you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  So she comes first, you are worthy.  And when you are
away, Gerald . . . with . . . her—oh, think of me sometimes.  Don’t
forget me.  And when you pray, pray for me.  We should pray when we are
happiest, and you will be happy, Gerald.

HESTER.  Oh, you don’t think of leaving us?

GERALD.  Mother, you won’t leave us?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I might bring shame upon you!

GERALD.  Mother!

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For a little then: and if you let me, near you always.

HESTER.  [_To_ MRS. ARBUTHNOT.]  Come out with us to the garden.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Later on, later on.  [_Exeunt_ HESTER _and_ GERALD.
MRS. ARBUTHNOT _goes towards door_ L.C.   _Stops at looking-glass over
mantelpiece and looks into it_.  _Enter_ ALICE R.C.]

ALICE.  A gentleman to see you, ma’am.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Say I am not at home.  Show me the card.  [_Takes card
from salver and looks at it_.]  Say I will not see him.

[LORD ILLINGWORTH _enters_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _sees him in the glass and
starts_, _but does not turn round_.  _Exit_ ALICE.]  What can you have to
say to me to-day, George Harford?  You can have nothing to say to me.
You must leave this house.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, Gerald knows everything about you and me now,
so some arrangement must be come to that will suit us all three.  I
assure you, he will find in me the most charming and generous of fathers.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My son may come in at any moment.  I saved you last
night.  I may not be able to save you again.  My son feels my dishonour
strongly, terribly strongly.  I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Sitting down_.]  Last night was excessively
unfortunate.  That silly Puritan girl making a scene merely because I
wanted to kiss her.  What harm is there in a kiss?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  A kiss may ruin a human life, George
Harford.  _I_ know that.  _I_ know that too well.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  We won’t discuss that at present.  What is of
importance to-day, as yesterday, is still our son.  I am extremely fond
of him, as you know, and odd though it may seem to you, I admired his
conduct last night immensely.  He took up the cudgels for that pretty
prude with wonderful promptitude.  He is just what I should have liked a
son of mine to be.  Except that no son of mine should ever take the side
of the Puritans: that is always an error.  Now, what I propose is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Lord Illingworth, no proposition of yours interests me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  According to our ridiculous English laws, I can’t
legitimise Gerald.  But I can leave him my property.  Illingworth is
entailed, of course, but it is a tedious barrack of a place.  He can have
Ashby, which is much prettier, Harborough, which has the best shooting in
the north of England, and the house in St. James Square.  What more can a
gentleman require in this world?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing more, I am quite sure.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  As for a title, a title is really rather a nuisance in
these democratic days.  As George Harford I had everything I wanted.  Now
I have merely everything that other people want, which isn’t nearly so
pleasant.  Well, my proposal is this.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I told you I was not interested, and I beg you to go.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  The boy is to be with you for six months in the year,
and with me for the other six.  That is perfectly fair, is it not?  You
can have whatever allowance you like, and live where you choose.  As for
your past, no one knows anything about it except myself and Gerald.
There is the Puritan, of course, the Puritan in white muslin, but she
doesn’t count.  She couldn’t tell the story without explaining that she
objected to being kissed, could she?  And all the women would think her a
fool and the men think her a bore.  And you need not be afraid that
Gerald won’t be my heir.  I needn’t tell you I have not the slightest
intention of marrying.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You come too late.  My son has no need of you.  You are
not necessary.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What do you mean, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That you are not necessary to Gerald’s career.  He does
not require you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I do not understand you.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Look into the garden.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _rises and goes
towards window_.]  You had better not let them see you: you bring
unpleasant memories.  [LORD ILLINGWORTH _looks out and starts_.]  She
loves him.  They love each other.  We are safe from you, and we are going
away.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Where?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  We will not tell you, and if you find us we will not
know you.  You seem surprised.  What welcome would you get from the girl
whose lips you tried to soil, from the boy whose life you have shamed,
from the mother whose dishonour comes from you?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You have grown hard, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I was too weak once.  It is well for me that I have
changed.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I was very young at the time.  We men know life too
early.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  And we women know life too late.  That is the difference
between men and women.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Rachel, I want my son.  My money may be of no use to
him now.  I may be of no use to him, but I want my son.  Bring us
together, Rachel.  You can do it if you choose.  [_Sees letter on
table_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  There is no room in my boy’s life for you.  He is not
interested in _you_.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Then why does he write to me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  What do you mean?

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What letter is this?  [_Takes up letter_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  That—is nothing.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is addressed to _me_.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are not to open it.  I forbid you to open it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And in Gerald’s handwriting.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not to have been sent.  It is a letter he wrote
to you this morning, before he saw me.  But he is sorry now he wrote it,
very sorry.  You are not to open it.  Give it to me.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It belongs to me.  [_Opens it_, _sits down and reads
it slowly_. MRS. ARBUTHNOT _watches him all the time_.]  You have read
this letter, I suppose, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  You know what is in it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I don’t admit for a moment that the boy is right in
what he says.  I don’t admit that it is any duty of mine to marry you.  I
deny it entirely.  But to get my son back I am ready—yes, I am ready to
marry you, Rachel—and to treat you always with the deference and respect
due to my wife.  I will marry you as soon as you choose.  I give you my
word of honour.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You made that promise to me once before and broke it.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I will keep it now.  And that will show you that I
love my son, at least as much as you love him.  For when I marry you,
Rachel, there are some ambitions I shall have to surrender.  High
ambitions, too, if any ambition is high.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I decline to marry you, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Are you serious?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Do tell me your reasons.  They would interest me
enormously.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  I have already explained them to my son.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I suppose they were intensely sentimental, weren’t
they?  You women live by your emotions and for them.  You have no
philosophy of life.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  You are right.  We women live by our emotions and for
them.  By our passions, and for them, if you will.  I have two passions,
Lord Illingworth: my love of him, my hate of you.  You cannot kill those.
They feed each other.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What sort of love is that which needs to have hate as
its brother?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It is the sort of love I have for Gerald.  Do you think
that terrible?  Well it is terrible.  All love is terrible.  All love is
a tragedy.  I loved you once, Lord Illingworth.  Oh, what a tragedy for a
woman to have loved you!

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  So you really refuse to marry me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  Because you hate me?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Yes.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  And does my son hate me as you do?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  No.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  I am glad of that, Rachel.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  He merely despises you.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What a pity!  What a pity for him, I mean.

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Don’t be deceived, George.  Children begin by loving
their parents.  After a time they judge them.  Rarely if ever do they
forgive them.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Reads letter over again_, _very slowly_.]  May I ask
by what arguments you made the boy who wrote this letter, this beautiful,
passionate letter, believe that you should not marry his father, the
father of your own child?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  It was not I who made him see it.  It was another.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  What _fin-de-siècle_ person?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  The Puritan, Lord Illingworth.  [_A pause_.]

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  [_Winces_, _then rises slowly and goes over to table
where his hat and gloves are_.  MRS. ARBUTHNOT _is standing close to the
table_.  _He picks up one of the gloves, and begins pulling it on_.]
There is not much then for me to do here, Rachel?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  Nothing.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  It is good-bye, is it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  For ever, I hope, this time, Lord Illingworth.

LORD ILLINGWORTH.  How curious!  At this moment you look exactly as you
looked the night you left me twenty years ago.  You have just the same
expression in your mouth.  Upon my word, Rachel, no woman ever loved me
as you did.  Why, you gave yourself to me like a flower, to do anything I
liked with.  You were the prettiest of playthings, the most fascinating
of small romances . . . [_Pulls out watch_.]  Quarter to two!  Must be
strolling back to Hunstanton.  Don’t suppose I shall see you there again.
I’m sorry, I am, really.  It’s been an amusing experience to have met
amongst people of one’s own rank, and treated quite seriously too, one’s
mistress, and one’s—

[MRS. ARBUTHNOT _snatches up glove and strikes_ LORD ILLINGWORTH _across
the face with it_.  LORD ILLINGWORTH _starts_.  _He is dazed by the
insult of his punishment_.  _Then he controls himself_, _and goes to
window and looks out at his son_.  _Sighs and leaves the room_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Falls sobbing on the sofa_.]  He would have said it.
He would have said it.

[_Enter_ GERALD _and_ HESTER _from the garden_.]

GERALD.  Well, dear mother.  You never came out after all.  So we have
come in to fetch you.  Mother, you have not been crying?  [_Kneels down
beside her_.]

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  My boy!  My boy!  My boy!  [_Running her fingers through
his hair_.]

HESTER.  [_Coming over_.]  But you have two children now.  You’ll let me
be your daughter?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Looking up_.]  Would you choose me for a mother?

HESTER.  You of all women I have ever known.

[_They move towards the door leading into garden with their arms round
each other’s waists_.  GERALD _goes to table_ L.C. _for his hat_.  _On
turning round he sees_ LORD ILLINGWORTH’S _glove lying on the floor_,
_and picks it up_.]

GERALD.  Hallo, mother, whose glove is this?  You have had a visitor.
Who was it?

MRS. ARBUTHNOT.  [_Turning round_.]  Oh! no one.  No one in particular.
A man of no importance.
